10. 'THE ALL INDIA SERVICES (CONDUCT)
RULES, 1968

In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 3 of the All India
Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951), the Central Government after consultation with the
Governments of the State concerned, hereby makes the following rules, namely:—

1. Short title and commencement. —
1(1) These rules may be called the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968.

1(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official
Gazette.

2. Definitions—tn these rules, unless the context otherwise requires—
2.(a) “Government” means—

(i) in the case of a member of the Service serving in connection with the
affairs of the Union, the Central Government; or

(ii) in the case of a member of the Service serving under a Foreign
Government or outside India (whether on duty or on leave), the Central
Government; or

(iii) in the case of a member of the Service serving in connection with the
affairs of a State, the Government of that State;

Explanation—A member of the Service whose services are placed at the disposal
of a company, corporation or other organisation or a local authority by the Central
Government or the Government or the Government of a State shall for the purpose of
these rules, be deemed to be a member of the Service serving in connection with the
affairs of the Union or in connection with the affairs of that State, as the case may be,
notwithstanding that his salary is drawn from the sources other than the Consolidated
Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of that State;

2.(b) ‘member of family’, in relation to a member of the service, includes—

(i) the wife or husband as the case may be of such member, whether
residing with (such member)’ or not, but does not include a wife or
husband separated from the member of the Service by a decree or
order of competent court;

(ii) the son or daughter or the step-son or step-daughter of such member
and wholly dependent 1(on such member) but does not include a child
or step-child who is no longer in any way dependent (on such member)
or of whose custody the member of the Service has been deprived by
or under any law; and

(iii) any other person related, whether by blood or marriage, to such
member or to his or her wife or husband, as the case may be, and
wholly dependent on such member.

‘Published vide Notification No.8/91/62—AIS(IIl) dated 18.12.1968 (GSR No.3 dt. 04.01.1969)
? Substituted vide DP&AR Notification No.11017/23/77—AIS(II) dated 19.04.78 (GSR No.583 dt. 06.05.1978)

181
 2.(c) “member of the Service” means a member of an All India Service as
defined in section 2 of the All India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951)

3(cc)Non—Governmental Organisation (NGO) means any organization
other than an Organisation owned or controlled by the Central
Government, a State Government or an International Organisation or
agency;

Explanation:— International Organisation in this rule will include a multilateral body
at the International level in which India is a member.

4(d) “Private undertaking” includes a company, firm or association or body of
individuals.

3. General.— 3(1)Every member of the Service shall at all times maintain absolute
integrity and devotion to duty and shall do nothing which is unbecoming of a member of
the Service.

°(1A) Every member of the Service shall maintain:-

(i) high ethical standards, integrity and honesty;

(ii) political neutrality;

(iii) promoting of the principles of merit, fairness and impartiality
in the discharge of duties;

(iv) accountability and transparency;

(v) responsiveness to the public, particularly to the weaker
section;

(vi) courtesy and good behavior with the public.

3(2) Every member of the Service shall take all possible steps to ensure
integrity of, and devotion to duty by, all Government servants for the time
being under his control and authority.

8(2A)Every member of the service shall in the discharge of his duties act in a
courteous manner and shall not adopt dilatory tactics in his dealings with
the public or otherwise.

7(2B) Every member of the Service shall:-

(i) commit himself to and uphold the supremacy of the Constitution
and democratic values;

(ii) defend and uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of State, public order, decency and morality;

(iii) maintain integrity in public service;

(iv) take decisions solely in public interest and use or cause to use
public resources efficiently, effectively and economically;

(v) declare any private interests relating to his public duties and take
steps to resolve any conflicts in away that protects the public
interest;

5 Inserted vide Notification No.11017/18/96—AIS(III),dated 16.11.1998 (GSR No.228 dt.28.11.1998)

* Inserted Vide DP&T Notification No. 11017/27/93—AIS(III) dated 13.01.1995(GSR No.52 dt. 04.02.1995)

° Inserted Vide DP&T Notification No. 11017/01/2014—AIS(IIl) dated 06.08.2014(GSR No.573 (E) dt. 08.08.2014)
° Substituted vide DP&AR Notification No. 11017/27/93-AlS(IIl) dated 13.01.1995 (GSR No. 52 dt. 04.02.1995)

7 Inserted Vide DP&T Notification No. 11017/01/2014—AIS(III) dated 06.08.2014(GSR No.573 (E) dt. 08.08.2014)

182
 (vi) not place himself under any financial or other obligations to any
individual or organisation which may influence him in the
performance of his official duties;

(vii) not misuse his position as civil servant and not take decisions in
order to derive financial or material benefits for himself, his
family or his friends;

(viii) make choices, take decisions and make recommendations on
merit alone;

(ix) act with fairness and impartiality and not discriminate against
anyone, particularly the poor and the under-privileged sections of
society;

(x) refrain from doing anything which is or may be contrary to any law,
rules, regulations and established practices

(xi) maintain discipline in the discharge of his duties and be liable to
implement the lawful orders duly communicated to him;

(xii) be liable to maintain confidentiality in the performance of his
official duties as required by any laws for the time being in force,
particularly with regard to information, disclosure of which may
prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of State, strategic, scientific or economic interests of the
State, friendly relation with foreign countries or lead to incitement
of an offence or illegal or unlawful gains to any person;

(xiii) | perform and discharge his duties with the highest degree of
professionalism and dedication to the best of his abilities.

3(3) 8(i) No member of the Service shall, in the performance of his official
duties, or in the exercise of powers conferred on him, act otherwise
than in his own best judgment to be true and correct except when
he is acting under the direction of his official superior.

(ii) The direction of the official superior shall ordinarily be in writing.
Where the issue of oral direction becomes unavoidable, the official
superior shall confirm it in writing immediately thereafter.

(iii) A member of the Service who has received oral direction from his
official superior shall seek confirmation of the same in writing, as
early as possible and in such case, it shall be the duty of the official
superior to confirm the direction in writing.

°Explanation _— A member of the Service who habitually fails to perform a task
assigned to him within the time set for the purpose and with the quality of performance
expected of him shall be deemed to be lacking in devotion to duty within the meaning of
the sub-rule (1);

Explanation Il:— Nothing in clause (i) of sub-rule (3) shall be construed as
empowering a Government servant to evade his responsibilities by seeking instructions
from or approval of, a superior officer or authority when such instructions are not
necessary under the scheme of distribution of powers and responsibilities.

5 Inserted vide DP&AR Notification No. 11017/2/79—AIS(III) dated 24.08.1979 (GSR No. 1122 dt. 08.09.1979)
° Substituted vide DP&AR Notification No. 11017/39/86—AIS(III) dated 01.01.1987 (GSR No. 34 dt. 17.01.1987)

183
 ‘iv) Prohibition regarding employment of children below 14 years of
age:— No member of the Service shall employ to work any child
below the age of 14 years.

4. Employment of near relatives in companies or firms.— 4.(1) No member of
the Service shall use his position or influence directly or indirectly to secure employment
for any member of his family with any private undertaking or ‘'Non- Government
Organisation.

4(2)(a) No member of the Service shall, except with the previous sanction of the
Government, permit (a member of his family) to accept employment with
any private undertaking or '*NGO having official dealings with the
Government.

Provided that where the acceptance of such employment cannot await
the sanction of the Government or is otherwise considered urgent, the
matter shall be reported to the Government, and the employment may be
accepted provisionally subject to the sanction of the Government.

4(2)(b) A member of the Service shall, as soon as he becomes aware of the fact
of acceptance by a member of his family of an employment with any
private undertaking or '*NGO report to the Government the fact of such
acceptance and also whether he has or has had any official dealings with
that private undertaking or “NGO

Provided that no such report shall be necessary if the member of the
Service has already obtained sanction of, or sent a report to, the
Government under clause (a).

4(3)(a) No member of the Service shall in the discharge of his official duties, deal
with any matter relating to, or award any contract in favour of a private
undertaking NGO or any other person, if any members of his family is
employed in that private undertaking or NGO under that person or if he or
any member of his family is interested in such private undertaking or
NGO or other person in any other manner.

4(3)(b) In any case referred to in clause (a), the member of the Service shall refer
the matter to his official superior and the case shall thereafter be
disposed of according to the instructions of the official superior.

5. Taking part in politics and elections.— 5(1) No member of the Service shall be
a member of, or be otherwise associated with, any political party or any organization
which takes part in politics, nor shall he take part in, or subscribe in aid of, or assist in
any other manner, any political movement or political activity.

5(2) It shall be the duty of every member of the Service to endeavour to
prevent any member of his family from taking part in or subscribing in aid
of or assisting in any other manner, any movement of, activity which is, or

© Inserted vide DOP&T Notification No. 11017/25/99—AIS(IIl) dated 01.02.2000 (GSR No. 51 dt. 12.02.2000)
" Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/18/96—AIS(III) dated 16.11.9198 (GSR No.228 dated 28.11.1998)

® Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/18/96—AIS(III) dated 16.11.1998 (GSR No. 228 dated 28.11.1998)

*S Inserted vide Not. No. 11017/18/96—AIS(III) dated 16.11.1998 (GSR No.228 dated 28.11.1998)

* Inserted vide Not. No. 11017/18/96—AIS(IIl) dated 16.11.1998 (GSR No.228 dated 28.11.1998)

184
 tends directly or indirectly to be subversive of the Government as by law
established, and where a member of the Service is unable to prevent
member of his family from taking part in or subscribing in aid of, or
assisting in any other manner, any such movement of activity, he shall
make a report to that effect to the Government.

5(3) If any question arises whether any movement or activity falls within the
scope of this rule, the question shall be referred to the Government for its
decision.

5(4) No member of the Service shall canvass or otherwise interfere with, or
use his influence in connection with, or take part in, an election to any
legislature or local authority:—

Provided that —

(i) a member of the Service qualified to vote at any such election may
exercise his right to vote but where he does so he shall give no
indication of the manner in which he proposes to vote or has voted,
and

(ii) a member of the Service shall not be deemed to have contravened
the provisions of this sub-rule by reason only that he has assisted in
the conduct of an election in the due performance of a duty imposed
on him by or under any law for the time being in force.

Explanation— The display by member of the Service, on his person, vehicle or
residence of any electoral symbol shall amount to using his influence in connection with
an election, within the meaning of this sub-rule.

‘86. Connection with press or radio—Previous sanction of the Government shall
not be required when the member of the service, in the bonafide discharge of his duties
or otherwise, publishes a book or contributes to or participates in a public media.

Provided that he shall observe the provisions of rules and at all times make it clear
that the views expressed, are of his own and not those of the Government.

7. Criticism of Government.—No member of the Service shall, in any radio
broadcast ‘or communication over any public media or in any document published
anonymously, pseudonymously or in his own name or in the name of any other person
or in any communication to the press or in any public utterance, make any statement of
fact or opinion,—

i. Which has the effect of an adverse criticism of any current or recent
policy or action of the Central Government or a State Government; or

ii. which is capable of embarrassing the relations between the Central
Government and any State Government; or

iii. which is capable of embarrassing the relations between the Central
Government and the Government of any Foreign State:

*® Substituted vide Notification No.11017/27/93—AlS(IIl) dated 13.01.1995 (GSR No. 52 dt. 04.02.1995)
*® Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/27/93—AIS(III) dated 13.01.1995 (GSR No. 52 dt. 04.02.1995)

185
 Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to any statement made or
views expressed by a member of the Service in his official capacity and in
the due performance of the duties assigned to him.

(GOI Instructions: D.P. & A.R. letter No. 11017/9/75—AlS(III), dated the
2nd March, 1976, reproduced under Miscellaneous Executive Instructions
at the end of these Rules)

8. Evidence before committees, etc.—

8(1) Save as provided in sub-rule (3), no member of the Service shall except
with the previous sanction of the Government, give evidence in
connection with any inquiry conducted by any person, committee or other
authority.

8(2) Where any sanction has been accorded under sub-rule (1) no member of
the Service giving such evidence shall criticize the policy or any action of
the Central Government or of a State Government.

8(3) Nothing in this rule shall apply to—

8(3) (a) evidence given at any inquiry before an authority appointed by the
Government, or by Parliament or by a State Legislature; or

8(3) (b) evidence given in any judicial inquiry; or

8(3) (c) evidence given at departmental inquiry ordered by any authority
subordinate to the Government.

8(4) No member of the Service giving any evidence referred to in sub-rule (3)
shall give publicity to such evidence.

9. Unauthorised communication of information.— No member of the Service
shall except in accordance with any general or special order of the Government or in the
performance in good faith of duties assigned to him, communicate directly or indirectly
any official document or part thereof or information to any Government servant or any
other person to whom he is not authorised to communicate such document or
information.

Explanation.—Quotation by a member of the Service (in his representations to the
Head of Office or Head of Department or President) of, or from, any letter circular or
office memorandum or from the notes on any file to which he is not authorised to have
access, or which he is not authorised to keep in his personal custody or for personal
purposes, shall amount to authorised communication of information within the meaning
of this rule.

10. Subscriptions.—No member of the Service shall, except with the previous
sanction of the Government or of such authority as may be empowered by it in his behalf
ask for, or accept, contributions to or otherwise associate himself with the raising of any
fund or other collections in cash or in kind in pursuance of any object whatsoever.

44. Gifts

11(1) A member of the service may accept gifts from his near relatives or from
his personal friends having no official dealings with them, on occasions
such as wedding, anniversaries, funerals and religious functions when the

*” Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/27/93—AIS(III) dated 13.01.1995 (GSR No. 52 dt. 04.02.1995)

186
 making of gifts is in conformity with the prevailing religious and social
practice, but he shall make a report to the Government if the value of
such gift exceeds '’Rs.25,000/— .

Explanation—For the purposes of this rule “gift” includes free transport, free
boarding, free lodging or any other service or pecuniary advantage when provided by a
person other than a near relative or personal friend having no official dealings with the
member of the Service but does not include a casual meal, casual lift or other social
hospitality.

11(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-rule (1), no member of the service
shall accept any gift without the sanction of the Government if the value of
gift exceeds '°Rs.5,000/—.

11(3) Member of the Service shall avoid accepting lavish hospitality or frequent
hospitality from persons having official dealings with them or from
industrial or commercial firms or other organisations.

11—A. Giving or taking of dowry.— No member of the Service shall—
(i) give or take or abet the giving or taking of dowry; or

(ii) demand, directly or indirectly, from the parents or guardian
of a bride or bridegroom, as the case may be, any dowry.

Explanation.— For the purpose of the rule, “dowry” has the same meaning as in the
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

?044(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rules (1), (2) and (3), a member
of the Service, being a member of the Indian delegation or otherwise, may
receive and retain gifts from foreign dignitaries in accordance with the
provisions of the Foreign Contribution (Acceptance or Retention of Gifts or
Presentations) Rules, 2012, as amended from time to time.

12. Public demonstrations in honour of Government Servants.—

12(1) No member of the Service shall except with the previous sanction of the
Government, receive any complimentary or valedictory address or accept
any testimonial or attend any meeting or entertainment held in his honour
or in the honour of any other Government Servant.:

Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to—

(i) a farewell entertainment of a substantially private and informal
character held in honour of a member of the Service or any other
Government servant on the occasion of his retirement or transfer or of
any person who has recently quit service of Government; or

(ii) the acceptance of simple and inexpensive entertainments arranged by
public bodies or institutions.

'S Substituted vide DP&T Notification No.1 1017/31/1999—AIS(IIl), dated 10.04.2015 (GSR No. 280 (E) dt. 10.04.2015
'° Substituted vide DP&T Notification No.1 1017/31/1999—AIS(IIl), dated 10.04.2015 (GSR No. 280 (E) dt. 10.04.2015
9 Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/1/2019—AIS(IIl) dated 15.09.2021 (GSR No. 634(E) dt. 15.09.2021)

187
 12(2) No member of the Service shall exercise pressure of any sort on any
Government servant to induce him to subscribe towards any farewell
entertainment even if it is of a substantially private and informal character.

13. Private trade or employment.—2"13(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule
(2), no member of the Service shall except, with the previous sanction of the
Government,—

(a) engage directly or indirectly in any trade or business, or
(b) negotiated for or undertake, any other employment, or

(c) hold an elective office, or canvass for a candidate or candidates for an
elective office, in any body, whether incorporated or not, or

(d) canvass in support of any business of insurance agency, commission
agency etc. owned or managed by any member of his family, or

(e) take part, except in the discharge of his official duties, in the
registration, promotion or management of any bank or other company
registered or required to be registered under the Companies Act,
1956 (1 of 1956), or any other law for the time being in force, or of any
co-operative society for commercial purposes.

22

Participate in, or associate himself in any manner, in the making of:—
(i) a sponsored media (including radio, television programme, or

(ii) a media programme commissioned by Government media, but
produced by an outside agency, or

(iii) a privately produced radio or television or other media
programme including a video magazine.

Provided that no previous permission shall be necessary in the case a
member of the service participates in a programme produced by the
Doordarshan on a subject dealt with by him in his official capacity.

23(

=>

Involve or engage himself in the registration, promotion, management
of other kinds of activities of any non-Governmental organization if the
same is aided by the Central Government, State Government or an
international organization or agency;

g

13 (2) A member of the Service may, without the previous sanction of the
Government,—

(a) undertake honorary work of a social or charitable nature, or

(b) undertake occasional work of a literary, artistic or scientific character,
or

(c) participate in sports activities as an amateur, or

*1 Substituted vide DP&T Notification No.11017/39/86—AIS(III), dated 01.01.1987 (GSR No. 34 dt. 17.01.1987) &
25.01.1989

? Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/27/93—AlIS(IIl) dated 13.01.1995 (GSR No. 52 dt. 04.02.1995)

5 Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/1/86—AIS(III) dated 16.11.1998 (GSR No. 229 dt. 28.11.1998)

188
 (d) take part in the registration, promotion or management (not involving

a
2,

the holding of an elective office) of a literary, scientific or charitable
society, or of a club, or similar organisation, the aims or objectives of
which relate to promotion of sports, cultural, or recreation activities,
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or
any other law for the time being in force; or

take part in the registration, promotion or management (not involving
the holding of an elective office) of a co-operative society substantially
for the benefit of the members of the Service or government servants
registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912), or
any other law for the time being in force in any State :

Provided that,—

(i) he shall discontinue taking part in such activities if so directed by
the Government; and

(ii) in a case falling under clause (d), or clause (e) of this sub-rule,
his official duties shall not suffer thereby and he shall, within a
period of one month of his taking part in such activity, report to
the Government giving details of the nature of his participation.

443(3) Every member of the Service shall, if any member of his family is
engaged in a trade or business, or owns or manages an insurance
agency or commission agency, report that fact to the Government.

13(4) No member of the Service shall accept any fee for any work done for any
public body or for any private person without the sanction of the
Government.

Explanation:—Fee means a recurring or non-recurring payment made, whether
directly or indirectly to a member of the Service from a source other than the
Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State, but does not include :—

(a)

(b)

unearned income such as income from property, dividends and
interest on securities; and

Income from literary, cultural, artistic, scientific, or technological
efforts and income from participation in sports activities as an
amateur.

?543(5) Contesting election to sports bodies etc.:- Subject to the provisions of
sub-rule (2) of rule 13, no member of the service shall, except with the
previous sanction of the Central Government:-

(i) hold an elective office in any sports association/ federation/ body,

by whatever name known at State/ National level for a term of more
than 4 years or for one term, whichever is less: provided that this
restriction will not apply to functionaries like the District Magistrate,
Superintendent of Police etc. when they hold posts in ex-officio
capacity at Divisional/ District/ Sub-divisional/ Taluk levels;

4 Substituted vide DP&T Notification No. 11017/39/86—AIS(III) dated 01.01.1987 (GSR No. 34 dt. 17.01.1987) &

25.01.1998

°5 Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/9/92—AIS(III) dated 27.09.1995 (G.S.R. No. 452 dt. 14.10.1995)

189
 (ii) Canvass either for his own candidature or for any other person for
holding elective office in such sports bodies is mentioned in clause
(i) above.

(iii) While canvassing for contesting elections either on his own behalf
or any other person, indulge in conduct and becoming a member of
the service.

(iv) Shall proceed on travel abroad in connection with the work or other
activities of any sports bodies described in clause (i) above without
prior cadre clearance from the Central Government

643A Use of Government accommodation:— No member of the service shall
sub-let, lease or otherwise allow occupation by any other person, of Government
accommodation which has been allotted to him.

14. Investment, lending and borrowing.—

2744 (1)No member of the Service shall speculate in any stock, share or other
investments but this provision will not apply to occasional investment
made through Stock-brokers or other persons duly authorised on licence
under the relevant law.

Explanation.— Frequent purchase or sale or both of shares, securities or other
investments shall be deemed to be speculation within the meaning of this sub-rule.

14 (2) No member of the service shall make or permit any member of his family
or any person acting on his behalf to make, any investment which is likely
to embarrass or influence him in the discharge of his official duties. For
this purpose, any purchase of shares from out of the quotas reserved for
Directors or their friends and associates, shall be deemed to be an
investment which is likely to embarrass the Government Servant.

14 (3) If any question arises whether any transaction is of the nature referred to
in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2), it shall be referred to the Government for its
decision.

14 (4) (i)No member of the Service shall save in the ordinary course of
business with a bank or a public limited company, himself or through
any member of his family or any person acting on his behalf.

(a) — lend or borrow or deposit money as a principle or agent, to, or from,
or with, any person or firm or private limited company within the
local limits of his authority or with whom he is likely to have official
dealings or otherwise place himself under pecuniary obligation to
such person or firm; or

(b) lend money to any person at interest or in manner whereby return
in money or kind is charged or paid;

Provided that a member of the Service may give to, or accept from a relative or a
personal friend a purely temporary loan of small amount free of interest or operate a
credit account with a bonafide tradesman or make an advance of pay to his private
employee :

5 Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/27/93—AlIS(IIl) dated 13.1.95
27 Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/27/93—AIS(IIl) dated 13.1.95

190
 Provided further that nothing in this sub-rule shall apply in respect of any
transaction, entered into by a member of the Service with the previous sanction of the

Government.

14(4)(ii) When a member of the Service is appointed or transferred to a post of

such nature as would involve him in the breach of any of the
provisions of sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (4), he shall, forthwith report the
circumstances to the Government and shall thereafter act in
accordance with such order as may be made by the Government.

15. Insolvency and habitual indebtedness.—

15 (1) A member of the Service shall so manage his private affairs as to avoid

habitual indebtedness or insolvency.

15 (2) A member of the Service against whom any legal proceedings is

instituted for recovery of any debt due from or for adjudging him as an
insolvent, shall forthwith report the full acts of such legal proceedings to
the Government.

15 (3) The burden of proving that indebtedness or insolvency is the result of

circumstances which, with the exercise of ordinary diligence, the member
of the Service could not have foreseen or over which he had no control,
and has not proceeded from extravagant or dissipated habits, shall be
upon him.

16. Movable, immovable and valuable property.—

16 (1) Every person shall, where such person is a member of the Service at the

NOTE I.

commencement of these rules, before such date after such
commencement as may be specified by the Government in this behalf, or
where such person becomes a member of the Service after such
commencement, on his first appointment to the Service, submit a return
of his assets and liabilities in such form as may be prescribed by the
Government giving the full particulars regarding :—

(a) the immovable property owned by him, or inherited or acquired by
him or held by him on lease or mortgage, either in his own name or
in the name of any member of his family or in the name of any other
person;

(b) shares, debentures, postal Cumulative Time Deposits and cash
including bank deposits inherited by him or similarly owned,
acquired or held by him;

(c) other movable property inherited by him or similarly owned,
acquired or held by him; and

(d) debts and other liabilities incurred by him directly or indirectly

In all returns, the values of items of movable property worth less than an
amount equal to two months basic pay of the member of Service’, in
value may be added and shown as a lump sum. The value of articles of
daily use such as clothes, utensils, crockery and books need not be
included in such return

191
 NOTE II. Where a member of an All India Service is appointed as a member of
another All India Service, he shall not be required to submit a fresh return
under this sub-rule.

?846(2) Every member of the Service shall submit an annual return in such form
as may be prescribed by the Government in this regard, giving full
particulars regarding the immovable property inherited by him or owned
or acquired by him or held by him on lease or mortgage, either in his own
name or in the name of any member of his family or in the name of any
other person.

16(3) No member of the Service shall, except with the previous knowledge of
the Government,—

(a) | acquire any immovable property by lease, mortgage, purchase, gift
or otherwise, either in his own name or in the name of any member
of his family; or

(b) dispose of by lease, mortgage, sale gift or otherwise any
immovable property owned by him or held by him either in his own
name or in the name of any member of his family:

°Provided that the previous sanction of the Government shall be
obtained if any such transaction is with a person having official
dealings with the member of the Service.

16 (4) Every member of the Service shall intimate the Government in respect of
each transaction, whose value exceeds *°two months basic pay of the
member of Service within a month of the completion of such transaction.

5'Provided that the previous sanction of the Government shall be obtained if
any such transaction is with a person having official dealings with the
member of the Service.

16 (5) The Government or any authority empowered by it in this behalf may, at
any time, by general or special order, require a member of the Service to
furnish within a period specified in the order, a full and complete
statement of such movable or immovable property held or acquired by
him or on his behalf or by any member of his family as may be specified
in the order and such statement shall if so required by the Government or
by the authority so empowered, include details of the means by which, or
the source from which such property was acquired.

%Eyplanation /— For the purpose of this rule, the expression movable property
includes inter alia the following property, namely :—
(a) jewellery, insurance policies the annual premia of which exceeds *two
months basic pay of the member of Service, shares, securities and
debentures;

5 Substituted vide Notification No.11017/45/76—AIS(III) dated 11.01.1978 (GSR No.151 dt, 28.01.1978)
*Substituted vide Notification No.11017/5-A/2011—AlIS(III) dated 05.05.2011 (GSR No. 363(E) dt. 05.05.2011)

?° Substituted vide DP&T Notification No. 11017/85/84—AIS(III) dated 15.10.1985 (GSR No. 1009 dt. 02.11.1985)

°° Substituted vide Notification No.11017/5-A/2011—AIS(III) dated 05.05.2011 (GSR No. 363(E) dt. 05.05.2011)

$! Substituted vide DP&T Notification No. 11017/85/84—AIS(IIl) dated 15.10.1985 (GSR No. 1009 dt. 02.11.1985)

%2 Explanation renumbered as Explanation, words “and radiograms” Substituted by words “radiograms and televisions
sets” and Explanation II inserted vide DP&T Not.No.5/23/72 AIS(III) dt.27.07.1774 (GSR No.834 dt. 10.08.1974)
*Substituted vide Notification No.11017/5-A/2011—AlIS(IIl) dated 05.05.2011 (GSR No. 363(E) dt. 05.05.2011)

192
 (b) loans advanced by or to such member of the Service, whether secured or
not;

(c) motor cars, motor cycles, horses, or any other means of conveyance; and
(d) refrigerators, radiograms and television sets.

Explanation Il_— For the purpose of this rule, ‘lease’ means, except where it is
obtained from, or granted to, a foreign national or foreign mission or a foreign
organisation controlled by, or associated with, foreign missions, or a person having
official dealings with the member of the Service, a lease of immovable property from
year to year or for any term exceeding one year or receiving a yearly rent.

16A. Transaction in immovable property outside India:—Notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-rule (3) of rule 16, no member of the Services shall except
with the previous sanction of the Government,—

16A (a) acquire by lease, mortgage, purchase, gift or otherwise, either in his
own name or in the name of any member of his family, any immovable
property situated outside India; or

16A (b) dispose of by mortgage, sale, gift or otherwise, or grant any lease in
respect of, any immovable property situated outside India which was
acquired or is held by him either in his own name or in the name of
any member of his family; or

16A (c) enter into any transaction with any foreigner, foreign Government,
foreign organisation or concern,—
(i) for the acquisition, by lease, mortgage, purchase, gift or otherwise,
either in his own name or in the name of any member of his family,
or any immovable property.

(ii) for the disposal of, by mortgage, sale, gift or otherwise, or the grant
of any lease in respect of any, immovable property which was
acquired or is held by him either in his own name or inthe name of
any member of his family

17. Vindication of acts and character of members of the Service:—No member
of the Service shall, except with he previous sanction of the Government have recourse
to any court or to the press for the vindication of official act which has been the subject
matter of adverse criticism or attack of a defamatory character.

33Provided that if no such sanction is conveyed to by the Government within 12
weeks from the date of receipt of the request, the member of the service shall be free to
assume that the sanction sought for has been granted to him.

Explanation.—Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to prohibit a member of the
Service from vindicating his private character or any act done by him in his private
capacity. Provided that he shall submit a report to the Government regarding such
action.

3447. Observance of cultural norms:— Every member of the service in his
personal capacity or otherwise shall —
(i) observe strictly, the existing policies regarding age of marriage, preservation
of the Environment, Wild Life and Cultural heritage:

(ii) observe the existing policies regarding crime against women and

85 Inserted vide Notification No.11017/27/93—AlS(III) dated 13.01.1995 (GSR No. 52 dt. 04.02.1995)
* Inserted vide Notification No. 11017/27/93—AIS(IIl) dated 13.01.1995 (GSR No. 52 dt. 04.02.1995)

193
 (iii) observe the two children family norms.

18. Canvassing.— No member of the Service shall bring or attempt to bring any
political or other influence to bear upon any superior authority to further interests in
respect of matters pertaining to his service under the Government

3549. Restriction regarding marriage.—
19 (1) No member of the Service shall enter into, or contract a marriage with a
person having a spouse living; and
19 (2) no member of the Service having a spouse living, shall enter into, or
contract, a marriage with any person:

Provided that the Government may permit a member of the Service to enter into or
contract, any such marriage as is referred to in clause (1) or clause (2) if it is satisfied
that—

(a) Such marriage is permissible under the personal law applicable to
such member of the Service and the other party to the marriage and
(b) there are other grounds for so doing.
19 (3) A member of the Service who has married or marries a person other than
of Indian Nationality shall forthwith intimate the fact to the Government.

20. Consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs.—A member of the Service

shall—
20(a) strictly abide by any law relating in intoxicating drinks or drugs in force in
any area in which he may happen to be for the time being;
3®90(b) not be under the influence of any intoxicating drink or drug during the
course of his duty and shall also take due care that the performance of
his duties at any time is not affected in any way by the influence of such
drink or drug;

3720.(bb) not consume any intoxicating drink or drug in a public place;
20(c) not appear in a public place in a state of intoxication;
20(d) not use such drinks or drugs to excess.

Explanation — For the purpose of this rule, ‘public place’ means any place or
premises (including a conveyance) to which the public have or are permitted to have,
access whether on payment or otherwise.

21. Interpretation.— If any doubt arises as to the interpretation of these rules, the
Central Government shall decide the same.

22. Delegation of powers.— The Government may, by general or special order,
direct that any power exercisable by it under these rules (except the power under rule 21
or the power under this rule) shall, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified
in the order, be exercisable also by such officer or authority as may be specified in the
order.

23. Ceaser and saving.— The All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1954
(hereinafter referred to as the said rules), shall cease to be in force:

55 Substituted/Added vide DP&AR Notification No. 9/32/70—AIS(IIl) dated 10.03.1971 (GSR No. 419 dt. 27.03.1971)
°° Substituted vide MHA Notification No. 9/2/70—AIS(IIl) dated 23.05.1970 (GSR No. 876 dt. 10.08.1974)
5” Inserted vide DP&AR Notification No.5/23/72—AlS(|I) dated 27.07.1974 (GSR No. 834 dt. 10.08.1974)
%§ Inserted vide DP&AR Notification No.5/23/72—AlS(IIl) dated 27.07.1974 (GSR No. 834 dt. 10.08.1974)

194
 Provided that the ceaser shall not affect—

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered under, the
said rule; or

any right, privilege, obligation, liability acquired, accrued or incurred under
the said rules; or

any penalty or punishment incurred under the said rules; or

any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right,
privilege, obligation, liability penalty or punishment as aforesaid; and any
such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced and any such penalty or punishment may be
imposed as if the said rules had not ceased to be in force.

[No. 8/91/62—AIS(III), dated 18-12-1968. (GSR No. 3, dt. 4-1-69)].

195
 MISCELLANEOUS EXECUTIVE INSTRUCTIONS

I. FORMS USED TO PROVIDE INFORMATION/RETURNS UNDER VARIOUS RULES

Form I

[See Government of India’s Instructions (1) and (2) below rule 16.]

Statement of Immovable property on appointment for the year.

1. Name of Officer (in full) and Service

to which the officer belongs.

2. Present post held

3. Cadre of the state on which borne

4. Present Pay: .........ccceeesceeeeseeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeaeee

Inapplicable clause to be struck out.

Name of| Name and detailsPresent | If not in own| How acquired Annual |Remarks
districts, of Property ‘alue name, state in| whether by purchase, income
sub- whose name lease, mortgage, from
Division, held and inheritance, gift or of property
Taluk and his/her otherwise with date
village in relationship to. of acquisition andj
which the members name with details o'
property is of the Service| person/ persons from
situated whom acquired.
1.Housing and
other buildings
2. Lands
Signature 0...
Date .0... ee

Note.— This declaration form is required to be filled in and submitted by every
member of the IAS/I.P.S. under rule 16(5) of the All India Services
(Conduct) Rules, 1968 on first appointment to the Service, and thereafter
at the interval of every twelve months, giving particulars of all immovable
property owned, acquired or inherited by him or held by him on lease or
mortgage, either in his own or in the name of any member of his family or
in the name of any other person.

Form—ll

[See Government of India’s Instruction 27 below Rule 16.]

Form for giving prior intimation of seeking previous sanction under Rule 16(3) of
the AIS (Conduct) Rules, 1968 for transactions in respect of immovable property.

1. Name and designation

196
 2. Scale of pay and present pay

3. Purpose of application—
sanctions for transaction/prior
intimation of transaction:

4. Whether property is being acquired or disposed of :
5. Probable date of acquisition/disposal of property
6. Mode of acquisition/disposal

7.(a) Full details about location, viz, municipal
No., Street/Village, Taluk, District and
State in which situated

(b) Description of the property, in the case
of cultivable land, dry or irrigated land

(c) Whether freehold or lease hold

(d) Whether the applicant’s interest in the
property is in full or part. (In case of
partial interest, the extent of such interest
must be indicated)

(e) In case the transaction in not exclusively
in the name of the Government servant,
particulars of ownership and share of
each member

8. Sale/purchase price of the property,
(Market value in the case of gifts)

9. In case of acquisition, source or sources from
which financed/proposed to be financed:—

(a) personal savings :
(b) other source giving details.

10. In the case of disposal of property, was
requisite sanction/intimation obtained/given for
its acquisition (A copy of the sanction/
acknowledgement to be attached

11.(a) Name and address of the party with whom
transaction is proposed to be made.

(b) Is the party related to the applicant?
If so, state the relationship.

(c) Did the applicant have any dealings with
the party in his official capacity at any time,
or is the applicant likely to have any dealings
with him in the near future?

(d) How was the transaction arranged?
(Whether through any statutory body
or a private agency through advertisement
or through friends and relatives.

197
 Full particulars to be given)

12. In the case of acquisition by gifts, whether
sanction is also required under Rule 11 of
the AIS (Conduct) Rules, 1968.

13. Any other relevant fact, which the applicant
may like to mention.

Declaration

liseuewarencrnveruememeeesceemmeeny hereby declare that the particulars given above are true.
| request that | may be given permission to acquire/dispose of property as described
above form/ to the party whose name is mentioned in item 11 above.

OR

ae hereby intimate the proposed acquisition/disposal of
property by me as detailed above. | declare that the particulars given above are true.

Station : Signature:

Date : Designations:

Note: 1. In the above form, different portions may be used according to
requirement.

2. Where previous sanction is asked for, the application should be submitted
at least 30days before the proposed date of the transaction.
Form—lll
[See Government of India’s Instruction 27 below Rule 16.]

Form for giving intimation or seeking previous sanction under Rule 16(4) of AlS
(Conduct) Rules, 1968 for transaction in respect of movable property.

1. Name of the Government servant
2. Scale of pay and present pay

3. Purpose of application-sanction for transaction/
intimation of transaction

4. Whether property is being acquired or disposed of :
5. (a) Probable date of acquisition/disposal of property:

(b) If property is already acquired/disposal of,
Actual date of transaction.
6. (a) Description of the property e.g. Car/Scooter/
Motorcycle/Refrigerator/Radio/ Radiogram/
jewellery/loans/insurance policies etc.)

(b) Make, model (and also registration number,
in case of vehicles), where necessary

7. Mode of acquisition/disposal(purchase, sale,
gift, mortgage, lease or otherwise).

8. Scale/purchase price of the property
(market value in the case of gifts)

198
 9. In case of acquisition, source or sources from
which financed/proposed to be financed

(a) personal savings
(b) other source giving details.

10. In the case of disposal of property, was
requisite sanction/intimation obtained/given for
its acquisition, a copy of the sanction /
acknowledgement to be attached

11.a. Name and address of the party with whom
transaction is proposed to be made.

b. Is the party related to the applicant?
If so, state the relationship.

c. Did the applicant have any dealings with the
party in his official capacity at any time, or is
the applicant likely to have any dealings with
him in the near future?

d. Nature of official dealing with the party.

e. How was the transaction arranged?
(Whether through any statutory body or a
private agency through advertisement or through
friends and relatives Full particulars to be given). :

12. In the case of acquisition by gifts, whether sanction
is also required under Rule 11 of the
AIS (Conduct) Rules, 1968.

13. Any other relevant fact, which the applicant
may like to mention.

Declaration

ae hereby declare that the particulars given above are true.
| request that | may be given permission to acquire/dispose of property as described the
above form/ to the party whose name is mentioned in item 11 above.

OR

Vee ec eee ee eee eeeeeeee eee eeeeneeeeeee hereby intimate the proposed acquisition/disposal of
property by me as detailed above. | declare that the particulars given above are true.

Station : Signature:

Date: Designations:

Note:1. In the above form, different portions may be used according to
requirement.

2. Where previous sanction is asked for, the application should be submitted
at least 30days before the proposed date of the transaction.

(DP&T Letter No. 11017/14/95—AIS(III)dated 16.5.1995.)

199
 Form—lV
[See Govt. of India’s decision No. 4 below rule 16].
Form of report/application for permission of the Govt. for the building of or
addition to, a house.
Sir,

This is to report to you that | propose to build a house/make an addition to my
house.

This is to request that permission may be granted to me for the building of a
house/making addition to my house.

The estimated cost of the land and materials for the construction/extension of the
house is given below:—

LAND :
(1) Location (Survey numbers, village, district, State).

(2) Area.
(3) Cost.
BUILDING MATERIALS ETC:
(1) Bricks (Rate/quantity/cost).
(2) Cement (Rate/quantity/cost).
(3) lron and Steel (Rate/quantity/cost)
(4) Timber (Rate/quantity/cost).
(5) Sanitary Fittings (cost).
(6) Electrical Fittings (Cost).
(7) Any other special fittings (Cost).
(8) Labour Charges.
(9) Other charges, if any.
TOTAL COST OF LAND AND BUILDING:

2. The construction will be supervised by myself/The construction will be done
DY berzgueuerss | do not have any official dealings with the contractor, nor did | have any
official dealings with him in the past.

| have/had official dealings with the contractor and the nature of my dealings with
him is/was as under:

3. The cost of proposed construction will be met as under:—
Amount

(i) Own Savings

(ii) Loans/Advances with full details.

(iii) Other sources with full details.

Yours faithfully

200
 FoRM—V
[See Govt. of India’s decision No.4 below rule 16.]

Form of report to the Government after completion of the building of a
house/addition of the house.

Sir,

In my letter No ............ dated .......... | had reported that | proposed to build a house
or make addition to my house/Permission was granted to me in Order No........... dated
the... for the building of house or making addition to my house. The construction of

the house or the addition to the house has since been completed and | enclosed a
Valuation Report duly certified by

2. The cost of construction indicated in the enclosed valuation report was financed
as under:—

Amount
(i) Own Savings.

(ii) Loans/Advances with full details.

Yours
faithfully,

( )
Dated:

(Note— Variation, if any, between the figures given above and the figures given in
Form Il may be explained suitably).

Valuation Report

We hereby certify that [We have valued House .............. constructed by

Shri/Shrimati and I/We give below the value at which we estimate the cost of
the house under the following headings:—
Cost

Rs. N.P.

1. Bricks.

2. Cement.

3. Iron and Steel

4 Timber.

5. Sanitary fittings.

6. Electrical fittings.

7. All other special fittings.

8. Labour charges.

201
 9. All other charges.
Total cost of the building:

(Signature of the valuation authority)
Date:

Il. INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING CONTACT OF MEMBERS OF THE ALL INDIA
SERVICES WITH FOREIGN NATIONAL/MISSIONS

1. Utmost discretion should be exercised in contacts with foreign nationals: -
Officers should exercise the utmost discretion in their contact with foreign
correspondents, members of foreign missions/organisations and other foreign nationals
in India. They should also avoid any conversation likely to reveal, even inadvertently,
information on matters of secret nature. They should scrupulously avoid over-
patronisation and indiscriminate and frequent acceptance of hospitality, particularly of an
informal nature, from foreign nationals or Indian nationals employed by foreign missions.
Such excessive hospitality could place the recipient under obligation to the host and may
thus impair the impartial and judicious exercise of his functions in the eyes of others.

2. Private Correspondence with foreign missions etc. should be avoided: - Private
correspondence with foreign Embassies/ Missions/High Commissions should be
avoided. Similarly, no private or personal correspondence on matters of an official nature
should be entered into directly with members of foreign missions in India.

3. Rules should be kept in mind in exchange of gifts with foreign
nationals/Missions: - |n the matter of exchange of gifts with foreign national/ members
of a foreign mission or acceptance of foreign articles from them the relevant provisions
of the A.I.S. (Conduct) Rules, 1968, should be borne in mind and prior permission taken
wherever necessary under the rules. It is to be noted that it would be illegal to bring
foreign exchange into this country save as provided for in the foreign Exchange
Regulations.

4. Prior permission is required for attendance at National Day Receptions by
foreign Missions:- Officers shall attend National Day Receptions by foreign Missions
only after obtaining the prior permission of the Government.

5. Invitations/Hospitality may be accepted only when these are from an officer of
equivalent higher diplomatic status; prior permission’ for Under
Secretaries/Deputy Secretaries:-

(i) Officers should normally accept invitations for formal or informal
entertainment offered by foreign diplomats only when the invitations is from
an officer of a corresponding or higher diplomatic status.

(ii) Officers of the Ranks of Under Secretary and Deputy Secretary and
comparable ranks should not accept any invitations except with the prior
and specific approval of the Secretary concerned.

6. Official and social calls should not be initiated and kept limited to appropriate
official level: - Officers shall not initiate action for paying official/social calls on Heads of
Missions/Consulates of other countries or members of the staff.

2. Officers should particularly ensure that the contacts with representatives of other
countries limited to their appropriate officials level.

202
 7. Report of conversations at social functions:- All officers who accept or are
permitted to accept invitations to social functions from foreign diplomats/representatives
of foreign mission should report to their senior officers any conversation with
diplomats/representative of foreign missions, on matter of interest and importance to
Government, on such occasions.

8. Return of hospitality accepted from foreign Mission/Consulates by local officers
is limited and not a quid pro quo basis:- It is well recognised everywhere that
diplomats are specially paid to enable them to entertain local officials and that the local
officer’s capacity to return their hospitality is limited. There need not, therefore, be
anything like a quid pro quo basis maintained in the matter entertainment between
diplomats and local officers.

9. Supply of information to members of Missions/Consulates and nationals of
other countries should not be made by the officer on his own: The Supply of
information to foreign Mission/Consulates or their members or foreign nationals is the
responsibility of the Central Government. Any officer, on his own, should not do this
directly or by implication. The contacts by junior officers with Personnel Assistants and
Secretaries in foreign diplomats or foreign national abroad with the permission should on
any account maintain contacts with junior diplomats personnel in foreign
Missions/Consulates except with the express approval of the Government.

10. Officers should not stay with foreign diplomats/national as guests in India and
should not invite diplomats to stay with them:-

(a) Officers should not stay as guest with foreign diplomats or foreign nationals
in India. They could, however, stay with foreign diplomats or foreign national
abroad with the permission of the Government.

(b) Officers should not invite foreign diplomats to stay with them as their guests
in India.

11. Permission should be_ obtained before seeking employment of
wives/dependants of officers in foreign mission: - An officer whose wife or
dependant intends to take up employment under a foreign mission in India or with any
foreign organisation (including a commercial concern) should apply to Government for
permission.

12. Lifts in aircraft belonging to foreign Embassies in India or foreign
Governments abroad should normally not be accepted: - No officer should accept,
or permit his wife or dependants to accept passage money or free air transport from a
foreign Mission/Government organisation. Exceptional cases where humanitarian or
compassionate grounds are involved should be referred to Government for grant of
permission.

2. Relaxation of this rule is permissible only in cases which are covered by specific
agreements or memoranda of understanding entered into by the Government of India
with foreign Governments or organisations and which might still be in force. In regard to
invitations to visits abroad, which may be accepted only after consultation with the
Ministry of External Affairs, the convention in respect of senior officers is that while local
hospitality offered by foreign Governments may be accepted from the host such
hospitality is not accepted from non-Government societies ,organisations, private parties
etc.

3. There would, however, be no objection to the acceptance of the cost of passage in the
case of officers who are invited by foreign Governments and organisations to participate

203
 in conferences, seminars, etc. if the invitation is extended to a particular officer by name
with a view to benefit from the expertise of the officer invited. In other cases, in which
participation in conferences etc. is considered desirable in the interests of the officer
concerned or the Department sponsoring his deputation, the cost of passage should
continue to be met by the sponsoring Department.

4. Within the foreign country, an officer could accept a free flight in connection with his
official duties only. When an officer and his family are in a foreign country as State
guests, it would be permissible for them to accept free flights from foreign Governments.

13. Previous knowledge of the Government is required for Disposal of immovable
property by lease to foreign nationals: - Under rule 16(3) of the AIS (Conduct) Rules,
1968, no officer shall, except with the previous knowledge of the Government acquire or
dispose of any immovable property by lease, mortgage, purchase, sale, gift otherwise,
either in his own name or in the name of any member of his family, provided that the
previous sanction of the competent authority shall be obtained by the officer, if any such
transaction is with a person having official dealings with the officer or otherwise than
through a regular or a reputed dealer the term ‘lease’ occurring in this rule covers letting
out accommodation on rent, either by written or oral agreement whether for a short
period or for a long one. It is clarified that prior permission should be taken or prior
intimation given, as the case may be, in regard to all transactions in immovable
properties, including lease as explained above with foreign nationals/ member of foreign
Missions/ organisations controlled by or associated with foreign Mission.

14. Prior permission of the Government is required for joining of foreign language
classes: - Officers who are desirous of joining foreign language classes conducted by
foreign Missions and Embassies in India or organizations controlled by, or associated
with foreign Missions or Indo—foreign cultural organisation should seek prior permission
from the Government.

Ill. ASSOCIATION WITH INDO-FOREIGN CULTURAL ORGANISATIONS

1. Officer should not associate with Indo-foreign cultural organisations without
the permission of the Government: - Officers should not be members of, or actively
participate in the activities of Indo—foreign cultural organisation without the permission
of the Government.

[M.H.A. letter No. 9/31/69—AlIS(III), dated 14-1-1970 read with M.H.A. O.M. No.
25/34(S)/67—Estt.(A), dated 22-5-1969].

2. State Governments should obtain prior approval of the Central Government for
granting permission to AIS officers for association with Indo-foreign cultural
organisations: - |n accordance with item 15 of extracts from Ministry of Home Affairs
Office Memorandum No. 25/34(S)/67—EStt. (A), dated the 22nd May, 1969 officers
should not be members of, or actively participate in the activities of Indo-foreign cultural
organisation without the permission of the Government. In view of the fact that Foreign
Affairs is the subject matter of the Central Government, a question arose whether
permission as envisaged in the said Office Memorandum should be granted by the
Central Government or the State Government.

2 It has been decided after careful consideration of the matter that so far as members of
All India Services working in connection with the affairs of the State are concerned,
permission should not be granted by the State Government without the prior approval of

204
 the Central Government. It is accordingly requested that individual cases of IAS/IPS/IFS
Officers be referred to the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms,
Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Environment & Forests respectively for
approval of the Central Government.

[DP & AR letter No. 5/21/72—AIS(III), dated 4-12-1972]

3. Association of moS with Indo-Foreign cultural organization would normally be
avoided: - It has been decided that, while Indo-Foreign cultural organization, may in
suitable cases, be looked upon with favour and assisted, the association of member of
the Service with such organizations, would be avoided.

[DP & AR letter No. 11017/9/75—AIS(III), dated 2-3-1976]

4. A moS should obtain prior permission of the government before he becomes a
member of a book club run by a foreign agency and accept books as gift: - It has
been decided that a member of the Service should obtain prior permission of the
government before he becomes a member of a book club run by a foreign agency if the
membership of the book club entitles such a member of the service to receive books as
gift. A member of the service while holding a post has been given permission, to become
a member of such book club, should consequent upon his transfer or appointment to any
other post, intimate the Government about his membership of the book club concerned
and thereafter act in accordance with such order as may be made by the Government.
For receiving books by way of gifts the question of acceptance of such gifts would be
governed by rule 11 of the All India Service (Conduct) Rules, 1968.

[D.P. & A.R. No. 5/17/72—AIS(III), dated 23-4-1973 and dt. 16-9-74.]

5. A moS should obtain prior permission of the Government before he becomes a
member of a foreign centre with multifaceted activities which includes Library or
book club facility: - |t was clarified in the Department of Personnel and A.R. letter No.
5/17/72—AIS(IIl), dated the 23rd April, 1973 that a Member of All India Services should
obtain prior permission of the Government before he becomes a Member of a book club
run by a foreign agency. It was further clarified in the Department of Personnel and A.R.
letter No. 5/17/72—AlIS(IIl), dated the 6th September, 1974 that prior permission for
accepting membership of a book club or Library run by a foreign agency would be
necessary only if the membership entitles such a member of the service to receive
books as gifts.

2. A question has now been raised whether a member of an All India Service should
obtain permission from Government for accepting membership of a foreign centre, which
extends book club facility in addition to providing cultural and other activities. It is
clarified that a member of an All India Service should obtain prior permission of the
Government before he becomes a member of a foreign centre with multifaceted
activities which includes Library or book club facility.

IV. PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN ACCEPTING OFFERS OF SCHOLARSHIPS/
FELLOWSHIPS AND OTHER KINDS OF GRANTS’ FROM _ FOREIGN/
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS.

(i) Offers from correspondence with foreign Governments/institutions for visits
abroad/grant of scholarships/fellowships or grants.—

The State Governments or the members of the All India Services individually
should not negotiate directly with foreign Governments/institutions/agencies

205
 (ii

and international organisations including Indo-Foreign Cultural Organisations
for the grant of Scholarships/fellowships/grants to the members of the All India
Services or offers to visit abroad. When such offers of fellowships etc., or offers
to visit abroad are received by the State Governments not meant for a
particular member of the Service directly from the foreign Governments or
organizations the State Government should forward the communication
together with the names of the members of All India Services, whom the State
Government would like to sponsor for the scholarships, fellowships, etc., to the
Ministry/Department of the Government of India who are concerned with the
particular Service. (At the same time the State Government should
acknowledge receipt of the offers from the foreign Government of organisation
concerned and inform them that all future correspondence in the matter should
be addressed by them to the Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs).
In other words, such invitations are not to be processed by the State
Government or accepted by the members of the All India Services without the
approval of the Ministry of External Affairs through the (i) Department of
Personnel and Administrative Reforms in the case of the members of the
Indian Administrative Service, (ii) the Ministry of Home Affairs in the case of the
members of the Indian Police Service and (iii) the Ministry of Environment
&Forests in the case of the members of the Indian Forest Service.

If however, such offers of fellowship, etc. or offers to visit abroad are addressed
to a member of the Service direct or addressed to the State Government
intended for a particular member of the Service by the foreign Government,
foreign organisation etc., the State Government should straightaway reject the
offer made by the foreign Government or foreign organisations, without
approaching the Central Government seeking the | concurrence for permitting
the members of the service concerned to accept the offer. The question of
selection of a member of the Service for fellowship or travel a grant should be
left to the Government to decide and not the foreign Governments, foreign
organisations etc. The intention behind this restriction is to discourage the
possibility of foreign Governments, foreign organisations etc. exercising
patronage by means of travel grants etc., and conversely the possibility of
members of the Service compromising their positions in some way as a result
of these facilities. The names of the members of the All India Services whom
the State Government would like to recommend for such fellowships, training
courses or travel grants in response to such offers should be sent to the
concerned Ministry/Department referred to above who would process the case
in consultation with the other Ministries of the Government of India.

Open advertisements by Central Ministries for foreign fellowships.—
Applications of members of the All India Services response touch
advertisements may be forwarded by the State Governments to the concerned
Ministries direct.

(iii) Open advertisements by foreign agencies for foreign fellowships.—

Applications of the members of the All India Services in response to such
advertisements should be routed through (i) the Department of Personnel and
Administrative Reforms in the case of the members of the Indian Administrative
Service, (ii) the Ministry of Home Affairs in the case of the Members of the
Indian Police Service, and (iii) the Ministry of Environment and Forest in the
case of the members of the Indian Forest Service.

206
 (iv) Officers who wish to go abroad for higher studies at their own cost.—Members
of the All India Services who wish to go abroad for higher studies at their own
cost may be permitted to seek admission in foreign educational institutions for
higher studies in subjects which are advantageous for, or directly relevant to,
the discharge of the duties usual o the service to which they belong, provided
they do not apply for financial assistance in the form of fellowships,
scholarships, travel grants etc. from the educational institutions. If they want to
make any request for financial assistance they should rout their requests
through (i) the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms in the
case of the members of the Indian Administrative Service, (ii) the Ministry of
Home Affairs in the case of the Indian Police Service and (iii) the Ministry of
Environment & Forests in the case of the member of the Indian Forest Service.

2. Whenever a member of an All India Service goes abroad for a fellowship, training
course etc., a copy of the orders issued by the State Governments may be endorsed to
the (i) Secretary to the Government of India, Department of Personnel and
Administrative Reforms and the Establishment officer to the Government of India, in the
case of a member of the Indian Administrative Service, (ii) Secretary to Government of
India, Ministry of Home Affairs in the case of a member of the Indian Police Service, and
(iii)Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Environment & Forests the case of
members of the Indian Forest Service.

3. The present procedure has been reviewed in the light of the Government's policy to
encourage higher studies in specialized areas by officers in order to gain greater
knowledge and exposure to the international environment and also to special areas of
learning. In view of the fact that the present system is far too stringent and causes
difficulties and delays in the processing of applications because by which officer might
miss the opportunity of getting admission etc. The procedure has been simplified as
under:-

(i) A member of the service applying for higher studies to a reputed foreign
university/training institution would require no prior permission of the
Government but would be required to keep Government informed of his
intention to apply to such universities and also indicate the subjects of study
he proposes to pursue.

(ii) In case the member of the service is applying for financial assistance to the
concerned university which is of standard nature and is available on open
merit based criteria, namely, university fellowships, teaching assistantship
research assistantship or tuition waiver, Government may only be kept
informed.

(iii

In case the member of the service proposes to receive financial assistance
from any other foreign source which is not of the type mentioned in (ii)
above, prior permission of the Government would have to be taken.

(iv) The question of taking leave or study leave is a separate issue and would
have to be dealt with after the officer obtains admission and applies for the
leave.

4. The Government may, however, at any time disallow the officer from pursuing his
application for admission of financial assistance in cases where Govt. is of the view that

207
 a member of the service has utilized his official influence to obtain the same or if the
Government feels that such course of action is not in the interest of the Government.

[Letter No. 11017/18/91-AIS(III)dated 1.7.91.]

5. The above instructions are issued in super session of Ministry of Home Affairs letter
No. 6/14/69—AIS(III), dated 21-7-1970 and letter of the same number dated the 6th July,
1971 of the (Deptt of Personnel).

[Deptt. of Personnel and A.R. letter No. 9/26/71—AlS(III), dated 25-7-1973].

V. PARTICIPATION IN CONFERENCES/SEMINARS ETC.

1. State Governments can permit a member of the Service working under them to
attend programmes organised by the various foreign cultural centres in India
which are properly scrutinised by MEA: — A question has been raised as to the
procedure to be followed and the authority competent to give permission to members of
All India Services for participating in conferences/seminars organised by United States
information Service/British Council similar “Cultural” Organisation of foreign mission etc.
in India.

2. This Department have examined this matter carefully. The programmes organised by
the various foreign cultural centres in India such as the United States information
Service and British Council etc. are properly scrutinised by the Ministries of External
Affairs, Home Affairs and Education and Social Welfare. In view of this, the State
Government can permit a member of the Service working under them to attend such
conferences or seminars without a reference to this Department. While giving the
permission to a member of the Service to participate in any such seminar or conference,
he should be asked to keep in mind the provisions contained in the All India Services
(Conduct) Rules, 1968, particularly rule 7 thereof.

3. As regards members of the Service who are working under the Central Government,
the Ministry or Department in which the officer is working can give such permission
without obtaining the concurrence of this Department.

[D.P. & A.R. letter No. 11017/9/75—AIS(III) dt. 2.3.1976].

2. Clearance of MHA under FCRA Act, 1976 is required to visit abroad to
participate international seminars: - |n the case of visits abroad by Government
servants to participate in international seminars etc., it is necessary, among other things
to obtain the clearance of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India under the
provisions of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976. For this purpose, a format
has been prescribed in which the particulars of the officers sponsored for the visit abroad
are required to be furnished to the Ministry of Home Affairs. A copy of the format, form
FC-2, is annexed.

2. While forwarding proposals for participation of Members of the All India Services in
international seminars etc. in foreign countries, the particulars in form FC-2, should
invariably be sent along with the proposal.

[G.I. DP&AR letter No. 11017/66/81—AIS(III), dated 23rd January, 1982].

208
 ANNEXURE to DP & AR Letter No. 11017/66/81—AlIS(III), dated 23rd January,
1982].

Form FC—2
[See rule 3 (b)].

Application for seeking prior permission of the Central Government to accept foreign
hospitality.

[Section 9 read with sections 10(a) and 11(I) of the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976].

1.

NO oO fF WD

Name in full (in block letters)

. Date of Birth

. Name of father.

. Present address.

. Permanent address.

. Passport Particulars (if already in possession of)
. Status.

Member of a Legislature.

Office bearer of a political party.

Employee of a Company/Corporations

Any person or class of person specified in Section 9.

. Names of countries/places to be visited with duration of stay.

9. The countries and places where foreign hospitality is to be accepted.

11

12.

13.

. Duration and purpose of visit to the country (ies)/ place(s) mentioned in column

9.

. Particulars of host(s):—

(a) If an individual, his personnel particulars including name, present
address, permanent address, nationality, profession.

(b) If an Organisation/ Institution/ Association/ Trust/ Foundation Trade
Union, etc. full particulars thereof including:—

i. Full Name and complete Address.

ii. Address of head Officer-Principal officer.
iii. Aims and objects.
iv. Particulars of important office bearers.

Full particulars as in serial II (a) & (b) of the foreign source in case the actual
source extending the hospitality is located in the country other than actually
proposed to be visited.

Nature and duration of hospitality proposed to be accepted (give specific
details).

209
 14. Nature of connection/dealings with the host and/or foreign source extending the
hospitality.

15. Approximate expenditure to be incurred on hospitality.
16. Any other information of significance, which the applicant may like to furnish.

DECLARATION

| hereby declare that the above particulars furnished by me are true and correct.

Place:
Date:
Signature of the Applicant.

3. Conditions for acceptance of invitations from Foreign Bodies/International
organizations to attend studies/seminars etc.: - |n some cases Central Government
officers are receiving invitations from foreign governments/foreign/organizations/
international organizations etc., for delivering lectures or presenting ‘papers’ at
Conference/Seminars/Workshops etc. For this purpose, these foreign
organizations/bodies are meeting expense on airfare, boarding and lodging but also
giving remuneration or honorarium to these officers. In large number of such cases, the
Screening Committee of Secretaries has been taking a view that these offices should
take leave as they are going abroad in their personal capacity. However, since there are
no guidelines in this regard, the matter has been considered and it has now been
decided that in cases where: —

(a) the invitation is received by the Government of India and the Government of
India selects an officer to attend such a workshop/ to present papers/ to
deliver lectures etc.; the officer may be treated as on official deputation;

(b) in cases where the invitation in received by the officer directly in his
personal capacity, the officer should be treated as on a personal visit and
he may be asked to proceed on leave.

2. In this connection, it becomes imperative to reiterate the guidelines mentioned in
Cabinet Secretariat's O.M. No. 21/1/7/94—Cab, dated 30" March, 1995, that generally
no Government of India officer will accept free passage or hospitality, the approval of the
Screening Committee of Secretaries or PM should be ensured to be taken before
accepting invitation in this connection.

3. As regard accepting remuneration honorarium, the orders given in SR—II and SR—
12(FR—SR—Part—l) and Government of India orders printed below them should be
strictly followed.

4. Proposals be regulated accordingly.

[OM No. 19036/1/2000-E-IV dated 21 March, 2000 of Ministry of Finance, Department
of Expenditure]

210
 VI. EMIGRATION OF MEMBERS OF ALL INDIA SERVICE TO OTHER COUNTRIES

1. No member of the service should apply for or seek emigration to any other
country so long as he is in Government service: - A question has been raised as to
whether a member of the service can correspond with foreign missions in regard to
emigration and whether they can be granted ‘no-objection-certificate’ for seek such
emigration to foreign countries. The matter has been considered carefully and decided
that no member of the service should apply for or seek emigration to any other country
so long as he is in Government service. Issuing a no-objection-certificate to any member
of the service, who wishes to migrate to a foreign country does not arise.

[Letter No.11017/70/93—AlIS(III) dated 30.12.93.]

Vil. APPLYING FOR JOBS AGAINST ADVERTISEMENTS:

1. Cadre clearance is not required for applying jobs in response to
advertisements, however, prior permission is required after selection under
respective Cadre rules: - A question has been raised as to whether the members of the
All India Services can be permitted to apply for posts advertised in the Press by the
Government, Public Sector Undertakings etc. The Govt. of India are of the view that
applications should be forwarded only in case where Government servants in lower
services with inadequate prospects seek further advancement. In the Indian conditions,
the All India Services offer the best available prospects for regular advancement and a
fair share of deputation posts in the Public Sector Undertakings etc. Therefore, the
members of the All India Services should not be permitted to apply for any post
advertised in the Press. Members of the Indian Police Service and in the Indian Forest
Service may, however, be permitted to apply for the combined competitive examination
for appointment to the Indian Administrative Service and Central Civil Services Class |.

[D.P. & A.R. letter No. 5/21/72—AlIS(III), dated 4-12-1972.]

2. The aforesaid instruction has, affected the prospects for regular advancement in
career of the members of the Service; therefore it has been decided that in response to
advertisements issued n the press by UPSC etc. the applications of the members of the
All India Services may be forwarded for consideration for the said posts. If the
Recruitment Rules for the post so advertised provide for ‘transfer on deputations’ also as
one of the methods of recruitment in the event of the selection, the officer may be
allowed to proceed on deputation if it is administratively feasible for the State
Government to spare the officer. In case the Recruitment Rules for the post do not have
any provision for ‘transfer on deputations’ the member of the service may be requested
to giver an undertaking at the time of making a request for forwarding the application to
the effect that, in the event of selection, he/she is willing to seek retirement or
resignation, as the case may be.
3. The deputation of the members of the All India Services to a post which has ‘transfer
on deputations” as one of the methods of recruitments, will be subject to the conditions
laid down in rule 6 of respective Cadre Rules of IAS, IPS and IFS, which requires all
deputations to be made with the concurrence/approval of the Central Government.
[DP&T letter Nos. 11017/9/91—AlS(III) dated 7.2.91 and 11017/9/91—AIS(III) dated
19.7.94]

211
 Vill. JOIN CORRESPONDENCE/EVENING COURSES

1. Permission to join correspondence/evening courses may be given if it is not
detrimental to official duties and can be withdrawn at any time: - References are
being received in the Department from various Ministries/Departments of the
Government of India regarding requests of members of all India Services for
Government’s permission for joining correspondence courses, evening classes,
language classes etc.

2. The Ministry/Department may examine case on merits and grant necessary
permission subject to the following conditions:—

(i) The permission does not ipso facto confer any right on the member of the
service for his continued posting at a particular station for the duration of the
course.

(ii) Pursuit of studies by the member of the service should be without detriment
to the efficient discharge of his official duties.

(iii) The grant of permission will not entitle the member of the service to leave
office by any particular time every day. On occasions requiring his presence
in office beyond the office hours, he will stay in office till the time required.

(iv) The Government will accept no responsibility for his failure to complete the
percentage of compulsory attendance prescribed for the course if any, of
this account.

(v) The permission will not entitle the member of the service to claim leave
either for preparation or for the duration of examination. Leave, if any,
required for this purpose will be sanctioned subject to title of any exigencies
of work.

(vi) The Government reserves the right to withdrawn the permission at any time
without assigning any reason.

[DP & AR O.M. No. 11017/44/77—AlIS(IIl), dt. 29-12-77.]

IX. LEGAL ASSISTANCE TO ALL INDIA SERVICE OFFICERS IN CONNECTION
WITH LITIGATION ACTION TAKEN BY THEM IN THE CASE OF THEIR OFFICIAL
DUTIES

1. Government can provide assistance to a moS in public interest, with litigation
action taken by them in the cases of their official duties: - | am directed to refer this
Department's letter No. 45/5/53—Estt. (A) dated 8.1.59 on the above subject and to say
that an increasing tendency has been observed among certain sections to lodge legal
complaints against members of the All India Services in their personal name for official
acts done by these officials in the case of their official duties.

2. While State Governments and the Central Government vide DP&AR letter No.
45/5/53—Estt(A) dated 8.1.59 do have provisions to undertake the defence of such
government servants in case it is in the public interest, whereupon all arrangements are
made by the Government, there in often a tendency for the State Governments to ask
the officer to undertake the defence on his own and consider reimbursement of the legal
expenses only in case such officer is successful in the legal proceedings. In other cases,
the State Governments may agree to provide legal expenses but subject to the condition
that in case is lost, the officer has to bear the entire cost of litigation. The practice of

212
 asking officers to defend themselves in such legal proceedings in bound to cause
harassment for such officers in addition to expense, the reimbursement of which by the
State Government and the extent thereof being uncertain.

3. In the performance of the official acts, the officer usually is only implementing the
decision of the Government and it is not unjust to expect that the Government would
undertake the defence of all government servants who have been impleaded in such
legal action. For this purpose, there appears no need to make a distinction as to
whether the complaint has been filed against the officers in their official designation or in
their individual name.

4. While the State Governments are themselves the best judge of the public interest in
respect of acts done by officers working for them the above may please be kept in mind
while examining the case in which officers are subjected to harassment through such
legal action.

[Letter No.11017/17/93—AIS(Il) dated 15/9/93]

X. ACCEPTANCE OF ‘FREE COMPANION TICKET’ BY GOVERNMENT SERVANTS
AND MEMBERS OF THEIR FAMILIAR UNDER THE ‘COMPANION FREE SCHEME’
INTRODUCED FROM TIME TO TIME BY VARIOUS AIRLINES.

1. Government servants may be permitted to accept the Free Companion Tickets if
benefits are restricted to travel by the national carriers: - The undersigned is
directed to refer to this Department's O.M. No. 11013/13/93—Estt.(A) dated 9.12.93 and
dated to say that in the light of the representations received from various quarters, and
the fact that such a scheme is part of normal sales promotion and is not confined to
Government servants alone, the Government have reviewed these instructions. It has
been decided to withdraw these instructions with immediate effect. Accordingly, the
Government servants may be permitted to accept the Free Companion Tickets or
variations thereof, provided that such benefits are restricted to travel by the national
carriers (Indian Airlines and Air India.)

[O.M. No. 11013/2/97—Estt. (A) of Government of India, Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances & Pensions (Department of Personnel & Training) dated the 5"
March, 1997]

2. No objection to Government servants accepting the free tickets earned by them
under Flying Returns scheme of Air India/Indian Airlines: - The undersigned is
directed to refer to this Department’s O.M if even number dated 5" March, 97 on the
subject mentioned above wherein it was provided that Government servants may be
permitted to accept the Free Companion Tickets or variations thereof provided that such
benefits are restricted to travel by the national carriers (Indian Airlines and Air India).
References have been received seeking clarification whether Government servant may
be permitted to accept the ‘Free Tickets’ earned under the ‘Flying Returns’ Schemes of
Air India/Indian Airlines. It is clarified that since the O.M. dated 5.3.97 permits
acceptance of Free Companion Tickets or variations thereof, there would be no
objection to Government servants accepting the free tickets earned by them under
Flying Returns scheme of Air India/Indian Airlines.

[O.M. No—11013/2/97—Estt.(A) of Government of India, Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions(Department of Personnel & Training) dated the 5"
March, 1997) dated the 15"" September, 1998.]

213
 3. No objection to Government servants availing of the benefit of “Frequent Flier
Programme” of Flying Return Programmers” of other Airlines: - The undersigned is
directed to refer to this Department’s O.M. of even number dated the 19" August, 1997
on the above subject wherein it has been clarified that there would be no objection to
Government servants accepting the free tickets earned by them under “Flying Return
Scheme” of Air India/Indian Airlines. References have been received seeking
permissions to avail such “Frequent Flier/Flying Return Programmers” of other Airlines
including foreign airlines.

3.2 The matter has been considered in this Department and it has been decided
that there would be no objection to Government servants availing of the benefit of such
“Frequent Flier Programme” of Flying Return Programmers” of other Airlines also. In so
far as the “Free Companion Scheme” is concerned, the availing of this facility should
remain confined to National Carriers only.

[O.M. No. 11013/2/97—Estt.(A) of Government of India, Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel & Training) dated the 15"
Sept., 1998.]

XI. BRINGING POLITICAL OR OUTSIDE INFLUENCE TO FURTHER SERVICE
INTERESTS

Action should be taken against Government servants approaching Members of
Parliament or State Legislature for sponsoring individual cases: - Rule 20 of the
CCS (CONDUCT) Rules, 1964 provides that no Government servant shall bring or
attempt to bring any political or other outside influence to bear upon any superior
authority to further his/her interest in respect of matters pertaining to his/her service
under the Government. The Government of India has, from time to time, emphasized
that Government servants should not approach Members of Parliament or State
Legislatures or other political/outside authorities to sponsor their cases in respect of
service matters. As per the existing instructions, vide O.M. No. 11013/7/85—Estt.(A)
dated 22.5.95, the following action should be taken against Government servants
approaching Members of Parliament or State Legislature for sponsoring individual
cases:

|. A Government employee violating the aforesaid provisions of the Conduct
Rules for the first time should be advised by the appropriate disciplinary
authority, to desist from approaching Members of Parliaments/Members of
State Legislature to further his/her interest in respect of matters pertaining to
his/her service conditions. A copy of this advice need not, however, be placed
in the CR dossier of the employee concerned.

ll. If a Government employee is found guilty of violating the aforesaid provisions
of the Conduct Rules a second time despite the issue of advice on the earlier
occasion, a written warning should be issued to him/her by the appropriate
disciplinary authority and a copy thereof should be placed be placed in his/her
CR dossier.

Ill. If a Government employee is found guilty of violating the aforesaid provisions
of the Conduct Rules despite the issue of warning to him/her disciplinary action
should be initiated against him/her by the appropriate disciplinary authority
under the provisions of CCS(CCA) Rules, 1965.

2. In spite of those instructions, cases of individual Government servants continue to be
sponsored by public representatives/outside authorities. After careful consideration of all

214
 aspects of the matter it has been decided that the following procedure may be adopted
for dealing with communications from public representatives/outside relating to the
service matters of Government employees:

(a) Communications received from public representatives regarding problems of
groups/categories of Government functionaries must be entertained and dealt
with on a time-bound basis. In all such cases, after due examination,
appropriate replies would continue to be issued at the level of the Minister
concerned.

(b) All communications from public representatives relating to the grievances of the
retired personnel should receive the same consideration and be dealt with in
the same way as outlined in (a) above.

(c) In cases in which a public representative sponsors the cause of an individual
Government servant (e.g. recruitment, appointment to a specific position,
complaints against supersession, expunction of adverse remarks, allotment of
Government accommodation, etc.) a formal reply should continue to be sent
from the Minister acknowledging the receipt of the communication stating that
the contents of the letter have been noted and where necessary, suggesting
that the person whose case has been recommended, may be advised to
represent his case through proper official channels. All such communications
addressed to the Minister shall be replied to at, his/her level. In all such cases
the formal reply given by the Minister shall be deemed to dispose off the
communication unless there are further directions from the Minister in the
matter.

3. All Ministries/Departments/Offices etc. are requested to bring the above instructions to
the notice of all concerned under their control and take action against the Government
servants who violate the provisions of the Conduct Rules as prescribed in para 1.

[Copy of DP&T O.M. No. 11013/12/94—Estt.(A) dt. 12.1.95]

XIl. OBSERVANCE OF THE PROVISIONS MANUAL OF OFFICE PROCEDURE
REGARDING ACTION ON ORAL INSTRUCTION

1. 1 am directed to forward herewith a copy of this Department's Office Memorandum No.
11013/4/88—Estt. (A) dated 19th April, 1988 on the above subject and to say that the
instructions (herein apply mutatis mutandis in respect of All India Service Officers.

2. It is requested that the instructions may be brought to the notice of the members of
the All India Services serving in the State. The State Governments may also consider
issuing suitable instructions in the light of regulations relating to Officer Procedure in the
States corresponding to the instructions in the Manual and Office Procedure enclosed
with this letter.

[D.P. & A.R. letter No. 11017/21/80—AIS (Ill) dt. 5-5-89, addressed to All State
Governments and copy endorsed to all Ministries/ Departments to the Government of
India, etc.]

Copy of DP & Trg. O.M. No. 11013/4/88—Estt.(A) dt. 19-4-88 addressed to all
Ministries/Departments etc, to Govt. of India.

1. The undersigned is directed to invite attention to the provisions of Rule 3 of the CCS
(Conduct) Rules, 1964 and paras 25 to 25-C of Central Secretariat Manual of Office

215
 Procedure (extracts enclosed for ready reference) which define the scope and role of
oral instructions in the transaction of Government business and also lay down the
detailed procedure to be followed whenever it becomes necessary to give oral directions
by a higher officer to a subordinate or when a member of the Personal Staff of the
Minister communicates an oral order on behalf of the Minister. Instances have come to
notice where the above provisions have not been followed.

2. The purpose for keeping a proper written record of policy decisions taken by the
various Government functionaries, when action in this regard is to be initiated on the
basis of oral instructions given by senior officers, is to ensure proper accountability of the
decisions taken on important matters and have a record of the considerations leading to
the decisions. It is, therefore, reiterated that the procedure prescribed in the Manual of
Office procedure and the provisions of the Conduct Rules referred to above should be
scrupulously followed at all levels in order to avoid ambiguity or doubts and to specify
responsibility when important decisions are taken. It is clarified that these provisions
apply equally to matters, which may be considered sensitive or secret. In such cases of
sensitive nature, adequate care should however be taken to accord proper security
classification to the relevant papers and to ensure their safe custody as envisaged in the
Manual of Departmental Security Instructions.

3. Ministry of Agriculture etc. may please bring the above position to the notice of all
administrative authorities under their control.

Extract from Manual of Office Procedure.

CHAPTER V
25. Oral Discussions—

(1) All points emerging from discussions between two or more officers of the
same department and the conclusions reached will be recorded on the
relevant file by the officer authorising action.

(2) All discussions/instructions/decisions which the officer recording them
considers to be important enough for the purpose, should be got
confirmed by all those who have participated in or are responsible for
them. This is particularly desirable in cases where the policy of the
Government is not clear or where some important departure from the
prescribed policy is involved or where two or more levels differ on
significant issues or the decision itself, though agreed upon by all
concerned, is an important one.

25A. Oral instructions by higher officers—

(1) Where an officer is giving direction for taking action in any case in respect
of matters on which he or his subordinate has powers to decide, he shall
ordinarily do so in writing. If, however the circumstances of the case are
such that there is no time for giving the instructions in writing, he should
follow it up by a writing confirmation at his earliest.

(2) An officer shall, in the performance of his official duties, or in the exercise
of powers conferred on him, act in his best judgement except when he is
acting under instructions of an official superior. In the latter case, he shall
obtain the directions in writing wherever practicable before carrying out
the instructions, and where it is not possible to do so, he shall obtain

216
 written confirmation of the directions as soon thereafter as possible. If the
officer giving the instructions is not his immediate superior but one higher
to him in the hierarchy, he shall bring such instructions to the notice of his
immediate superior at the earliest.

25B. Oral orders on behalf of or from Minister—

(1)

(2)

(3)

Whenever a member of the personal staff of a Minister communicates to
any officer an oral order on behalf of the Minister, it shall be confirmed by
him in writing immediately thereafter.

If any officer receives oral instructions from the Minister or from his
personal staff and the orders are in accordance with the norms, rules,
regulations or procedures they should be brought to the notice of the
secretary or the head of the department where the officer concerned is
working in or under a non-secretariat organisation.

If any officer receives oral instructions from the Minister or from his
personal staff and the orders are not in accordance with the norms, rules,
regulations or procedures, he should seek further clear orders from the
secretary (or the head of the department in case he is working in or under
a non-secretariat organisation) about the line of action to be taken, stating
clearly that the oral instructions are not in accordance with the rules,
regulations, norms or procedures.

25C. Confirmation of oral instructions

(1)

(2)

If an officer seeks confirmation of an oral instruction given by his superior,
the latter should confirm it in writing whenever such confirmation is
sought.

Receipt of communications from junior officer seeking confirmation of oral
instructions should be acknowledged by the senior officers or their
personal staff, or the personal staff of the Minister, as the case may be.

Xill. BAN ON PARTICIPATION OF CERTAIN ORGANISATIONS

1. Ban on participation in certain organisations like R.S.S., Jamat-e-lslami, Anand
Marg and CPM(L) etc that have been banned by rule 33 of the Defence and Internal
Security of India Rules, 1971: - | am directed to say that certain organisations like the
R.S.S., Jamat-e-lslami, Anand Marg and CPM(L) have been banned under the
provisions of rule 33 of the Defence and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971 vide
Ministry of Home Affairs Gazette Notifications dated 3rd and 4th July, 1975 (copies
enclosed for ready reference). This rule, inter alia provides that no person shall :—

(a)

manage or assist in managing any organisation to which the rule applies;

promote or assist in promoting a meeting of any members of such
organisation, or attend any such meeting in any capacity;

publish any notice or advertisement relating to any such meeting; and

invite persons to support such an organisation or otherwise in any way
assist the operations of such organisation.

217
 Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of the above rule, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine
or with both.

2. Sub-rule (1) of rule 5 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, provides that no
members of the service shall be a member of, or be otherwise associate with any
political party or any organisations which takes part in politics nor shall he take part in, or
subscribe in aid, or assist in any other manner, any political movement or political
activity. Members of the service who are found to have connections with these banned
organisations are liable to be dealt with suitably in departmental proceedings. In
appropriate cases action could also be considered against them under proviso (c) of
clause 2 of article 311 of the Constitution.

3. | am to request that these instructions may be brought to the notice of all members of
the All India Services working under the State Government.

[O.M. No. 11017/50/75—AIS(IIl), Dated 6" March, 1976 addressed to All State
Governments and the Ministries/Deptts. of the Government of India, etc.]

Rule 33 of the Defence and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971 (vide M.H.A.
Gazette Notification Dated 3rd and 4th July, 1975).

$S.O. 304(E).— Whereas the Central Government is satisfied with respect to the
organisations specified in the schedule below that they are organisations which are and
whose members and the persons in control whereof are, indulging in activities prejudicial
to the internal security, the public safety and the Maintenance of public order:

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-rule (1) of rule 33 of the
Defence and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971, the Central Government hereby
directs that the said rule shall apply to the organisations specified in the schedule below.

The Schedule
1. Anand Marg.
2. Proutist Forum of India.
3. Proutist Block of India.
4. Vishya Sanskranti Seva also known as Volunteer Social Service.
5. Sewa Dharm Mission.
6. Education, Relief and Welfare Section.
7. Pragatisheel Bhojpuri Samaj.
8. Angika Samaj.
9. Baghelkhand Samaj.
10. Universal Proutist Labour Federation.
11. Universal Proutist Students Federation.
12. Renaissance Universal Club.
13. Renaissance Artists and Writers Association.
14. Anand Marg Universal Relief Team.

[No. 1/16013/5/75—S & P(D.II)]

218
 $.0.305(E).— Whereas the Central Government is satisfied with respect of the
organisations specified in the schedule below that they are organisations which are and
whose members and the persons in control whereof are, indulging in activities prejudicial
to the internal security, the public safety and the maintenance of public order:

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-rule (1) of rule 33 of the
Defence and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971, the Central Government hereby
directs that the said rule shall apply to the organisations specified in the schedule below.

The Schedule

1. Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist) (Charu Mazumdar Group-Pro-Lin Piao

Faction.

2. Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist) (Charu Mazumdar Group-anti-Lin-Piao
Faction).

3. United Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist) (S.N. Singh—Chandra pulla Reddy
Group).

4. The Andhra Pradesh Communist Committee (Revolutionaries) (T. Negi Reddy
Group).

Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist) (Suniti Ghosh-Sharma Faction).
Eastern India Zonal Consolidation Committee of the Communist Party (Marxist-
Leninist).
7. The Maoist Communist Centre.
8. The Mukti Yadha Group.
9. Unity Centre of Communist Revolutionaries of India (Marxist-Leninist).
10. Centre of Indian Communists.
[No. 11/16013/5/75—S & P (D.II)]

$.0.306 [E]—Whereas the Central Government is satisfied with respect to the
organisations known as Rashtriya Sawyam Sevak Sangh that it is an organisations
which is and whose members and the persons in control whereof, are indulging in
activities prejudicial to the internal security, the public safety and the Maintenance of
public order:

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-rule (1) of rule 33 of the
Defence and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971, the Central Government hereby
directs that the said rule shall apply to the Rashtriya Sawyam Sevak Sangh aforesaid.

[No. 11/16013/5/75—S & P (D.II)]
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS Notification No. 234 dt. 4.7.1975:—

$S.O. 307(E).— Whereas the Central Government is satisfied with respect to the
organisations specified in the schedule below that they are organisations which are and
whose members and the persons in control whereof are, indulging in activities prejudicial
to the internal security, the public safety and the Maintenance of public order:

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-rule (1) of rule 33 of the
Defence and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971, the Central Government hereby
directs that the said rule shall apply to the Jammat-e-Islami-e-Jammu and Kashmir
aforesaid.

219
 [No. 11/60/5/75—S&P(D—II)]

$.0.307(E).— Whereas the Central Government is satisfied with respect of the
organisations specified in the schedule below that they are organisations which are and
whose members and the persons in control whereof are, indulging in activities prejudicial
to the internal security, the public safety and the maintenance of public order:

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-rule (1) of rule 33 of the
Defence and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971, the Central Government hereby
directs that the said rule shall apply to the Jammat-e-Islami-e-Jammu and Kashmir
aforesaid.

[No. 11/60/5/75—S&P(D—II)]

2. Action will be taken against the Government Servant found participating in
banned organisations under normal service rules: - The undersigned is directed to
refer to this Department’s Office Memorandum No. 18011/1/S/75—Estt.(B) dated the
28" November, 1975 on the subject mentioned above and to say that consequent upon
the lifting of the ban on organizations may be treated as deleted. Hereafter, action may
be taken against Central Government employees if they come to notice for participation
in the activates of the political organizations, under the normal service rules, such as rule
5 of the Central Civil Service (Conduct) Rules 1964, or corresponding rules governing
the service conditions of other categories of the employees.

The Ministry of Finance etc. are requested to bring the contents of this Office
Memorandum to the notice of all concerned including those working in their attached and
subordinate offices.

[OM No. 34013/4/(S)/77—Estt. (B) of Government of India Ministry of Home Affairs
Departments if Personnel and Administrative Reforms dated the 23" April, 1977]

3. Ban on association with Anand Marg or any of its organisations: - \t has been
decided that the instructions contained in Department of Personnel & A.R. letter No.
15014/6(S)/80—Estt.(B), dated the 31° December, and 5" Aug. 81C regarding
association of Govt. servants with the activities of Anand Marg will apply to members of
All India Service also.

2. According to Rule 5 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules 1968, no member of an
All India service shall be a member of, or be otherwise associated with any political party
or any other organisation which takes part in politics, nor shall take part in, or subscribe
in aid of, or assist in any other manner, any political movement or political activity.
Membership of or association of a member of an All India Service with the Activities of
the Anand Marg movement would attract the provisions of the above rule and any
member of the Service who contravenes the provisions of the above rules would be
liable to disciplinary action.

[G.I. M.H.A. D.P.&A.R letter no.11017/68/81-AlS(III) dated 34d March, 1982]

G.I, M.H.A. D.P. & A.R. letter No.15014/6/(S)/80—Estt.(B), dated 31°’ December,
1980 to the Chief Secretaries of all State Governments on association of
Government servants with the activities of Anand Marg.

| am directed to say that the Government of India consider that a Government
servant's membership of or association with the activities of movement known as Anand
Marg would attract the provisions of sub-rule(1) of Rule 5 of the Central Civil Services
(Conduct) Rules, 1964 which lays down that no Government servant shall be a member
of, or be otherwise associated with any political party of any organization which takes

220
 part in politics nor shall be take part in, subscribe in aid of, or assist in any other manner,
any political movement or activity. Instructions have been issued to Ministries etc. at the
Centre that a Government Servant who contravenes the provisions of the above rule and
takes part in the activities etc. of Anand Marg or any of its organizations (see list in
Annexure) would be liable to disciplinary action.

2.1 am to request that if there is no objection the State Government may also
consider the question of issuing similar instructions in the case of the State Government
servants.

1. VSS (Volunteer Social Service).
2. Amra Bengali.

3. The Progressive Fenderation of India.
4. The. Proutist Forum of India.

5. Angika Samaj.

6. Pragatisheel Bhojpuri Samaj.

7. Nagpuri Samaj

8. Maithill Samaj

9. Pragatisheel Bhojpuri Samaj.

10. Braj Samaj.

11. Awadhi Samaj.

12. Bundeli Samaj

13. Garhwali Samaj

14. Kumaoni Samaj

15. Pragatisheel Haryana Samaj

16. Asia Punjabi

17. Proutist League.

Copy of MHA DP&AR OM No. 15014/6/(5)/80—Estt.(B) dated 5-8-1981.
SUBJECT :Association of Government servants with the activities of Anand Marg.

The undersigned is directed to invite the attention of the Ministry of Finance etc. to
this Department’s O.M. No. 15014/6/(S)/80—Estt.(B), dated the 31S‘ December, 1980 on
the above subject and to say that in the Annexure to the said O.M., the Organisations as
per list enclosed may be added.

|. The Ministry of Finance, etc. are requested to bring the above to the notice of all
Government employees working in or under them.

LIST OF FRONT ORGNISATIONS OF ANAND MARG

18. Education, Relief and Welfare Section.
19. Sewa Dharm Mission

20. Anand Marg Universal Relief Team.
21. Women’s Welfare Department.

22. Girl Volunteers.

23. Spiritual Sports & Adventures Club.
24. Proulist Bloc of India.

25. Proutist Universal

26. Universal Proutist Labour Federation
27. Universal Proutist Youth Federation
28. Universal Proutist Student Federation

221
 29. Universal Proutist Intellectual Federation
30. Universal Proutist Farmer's Federation
31. Renaissance Artists’ & Writers’ Association.
32. Renassance Universal

33. Ek Manav Samaj

34. Bhojpuri Samaj

35. Chhatisgarh Samaj

36. Malwi Samaj

37. Vidarbha Samaj

38. Telangana Samaj

39. Circal Samaj

40. Utkal Samaj

41. Kosal Samaj

42. Navya Malayalam Samaj

43. Konkani Samaj

44. Kannad Samaj

45. Tulu Samaj

46. Dogri Samaj

47. Haryanavi Samaj

48. Pahari Samaj

49. Haroti Samaj

50. Sahvadri Samaj

51. Gurjar Samaj

52. Coorgi Samaj

53. Tamil Samaj

54. Rayalaseeema Samaj

55. Assam Unnayan Samaj

56. Mewari Samaj

57. Marwari Samaj

58. Kathiawari Samaj

XIV. OBSERVANCE OF PROPER PROCEDURE IN OFFICIAL DEALINGS BETWEEN
THE ADMINISTRATION AND MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT AND’ STATE
LEGISLATURES

1. Procedure for corresponding with Members of the Parliament/State Legislature:
- With regard to the correspondence with the Members of Parliament, a copy of the
guidelines(O.M. No. 25/19/64—Estt.(A) dated 8.11.1974) on the subject issued by the
Government of India is enclosed for necessary action. A separate O.M. No.
11013/2/2000—Estt.(A) dated the 23 May, 2000 giving the details about official
dealings between the Administration and Members of Parliament and Members of State
Legislatures is also enclosed. Extracts of the relevant portion of the Central Secretariat
Manual of Office Procedure are also enclosed herewith for guidance.

2. As regards the availability of the members of the All India Services on telephones, it is
indicated that even though the members of the Service may not always be available on
telephone because of the exigencies of work, they are supposed to make suitable
arrangements for getting recorded during their absence the message received from the

222
 Members of Parliaments and the messages received from the Members of State
Legislatures and getting back to them as soon as they are in a position to do and also for
talking suitable actions on the basis of the message received from the Hon’ble
Members. Suitable arrangements must be made so that the members of the Parliament
are not put to inconvenience and any indifferent attitude in this respect should be
strongly dealt with under AIS(D&A) Rules, 1969.

3. It is requested that copies of these instruction /guidelines may kindly be circulated
among all the members of the Service for strict compliance.

[letter No. 2801 1/3/2000—AIS (III) dated 11.7.2000]

Copy of O.M. No.11013 /2/2000—Estt. (A) of Government of India Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions (Department of Personnel and
Training) dated the 23 May, 2000.

1. The undersigned is directed to say that the broad guidelines to govern the
official dealings between the Administration and Members or Parliament and State
Legislature were issued vide Personnel & A..R. O.M. No. 25/19/64—Estt.(A) dated 8"
November, 1974. Although these guidelines were reiterated from time-to-time vide
Department of Personnel & Training O.Ms. dated 21.12.92 and 29.10.96 yet there are
instances where the laid down procedure and protocol has not been observed property.
The Parliamentary Committee during the course of meeting on demands for grants of
Ministry of Home Affairs raised a point that there is a need to issue fresh instructions in
the matter, as the earlier instructions are not available in most of operative officers. The
Committee also observed that letters are not replied in some cases by the person who
has been addressed by Members of Parliament/Members of Legislative Assembly.

2. As the members of Parliament and State Legislatures occupy, in our democratic
set up, a very important place as accredited representative of people, they have
important functions to perform under the Constitution and they find it necessary to seek
information from the Ministries/Departments of the Govt. of India or the State
Governments, or make suggestions for their consideration or ask for interviews with the
officers in connection with their Parliamentary and allied duties. In this connection,
certain well recognized principles and conventions to govern the relations between
Members of Parliament and of State Legislatures and Government servants have
already been established. The existing instructions emphasise that it should be
endeavour of every officer to help Members of Parliament and State Legislature to the
extent possible in the discharge of their functions under the Constitution. The basis
principles to be borne in mind by the Govt. servants while interacting with the Members
of Parliament and State Legislatures are that: —

(i) The Government servants should show courtesy and consideration to
Members of Parliament and State Legislatures may have to say, they should
always act according to their own best judgement.

(ii) That while they should consider carefully of listen patiently to what the
Members of Parliament and State Legislatures may have to say, they should
always act according to their own best judgement.

(iii) Any deviation from an appointment made with a Member must be promptly
explained to him to avoid any possible inconvenience. Fresh appointment
should be fixed in consultation with him.

223
 (iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

An officer should be meticulously correct and courteous and rise to receive
and see off a Member visiting him.

Members of Parliament/State Legislatures of the area to be invariably invited
to public function organised by a Govt. office. Proper and comfortable seating
arrangements at public functions to be made for Member who appear above
officers of the rank of Secretaries to Government of India in Warrant of
Precedence.

Letters from Members of Parliament and Members of State Legislatures must
be promptly acknowledged, and a reply sent at an appropriate level
expeditiously. Relevant provisions of the Manual of Office Procedure should
be observed in this regard.

Information or statistics relating to matter of local importance must be
furnished to M.Ps, and M.L.As when asked for. If request is to be refused,
instructions from higher authority should be taken.

A Government servant should not approach MPs/MLAs for sponsoring his
individual case; and

References from Committees of Parliament must be attended to promptly. A
senior officer at the level of Joint Secretary or equivalent should be charged
with the responsibility for ensuring this.

The Officers should not ignore telephonic messages left for them by the
Members of Parliament/State Legislatures in their absence and should try to
contact at the earliest the concerned Member of Parliament/State Legislature.

3. All Ministries/Departments are requested to ensure that the above basic
principles and instructions are followed by all concerned in letter and spirit. It may also
be impressed on all concerned that violation of the laid down guidelines will be viewed

seriously.

Paras 57, 60 & 122 of Central Secretariat Manual of Office Procedure (Eleventh
Edition, 1998)

57. Correspondence with Member of Parliament

(1)

(2)

(3)

Communications received from Members of Parliament should be attended
to promptly.

Where a communication is addressed to a Minister, it should, as far as
practicable, be replied to by the Minister himself. In other cases, a reply
should normally be issued over the signature of an officer of the rank of
Secretary only.

Where, however, a communication is addressed to the head of an attached
or subordinate office, Public Sector Undertaking ) financial institutions
(including nationalized banks) Division/Branch In charge in a Ministry/
Department/ Organisation, it should be replied to by the addressee himself.
In routine matters not involving question of policy, he may send an
appropriate reply on his own. In matters involving questions of policy the
officer should have prior consultation with higher authorities before sending
a reply. It should, however, be ensured that minimum level at which such
replies are sent to Members of Parliament is that of Under Secretary and
that also in letter form only.

224
 (4) Normally Information sought by a Member should be supplied it is such a
nature that it would have been denied to him even if asked for on the floor of
the Houses of Parliament.

(5) As far as possible, in corresponding with Members of Parliament, pre-
printed or cyclostyled copies should be avoided.

(6) In case reference from an Ex-Member of Parliament (or MP who has not
been re-elected) is addressed to a Minister or Secretary, reply to such
reference may be sent by the concerned Divisional Head after obtaining
approval of the Secretary of the Ministry/Department. In case the reference
is addressed to a lower level officer reply to such reference could be sent by
the officer on his own in non-policy cases and after obtaining approval of the
higher authorities in policy cases. However, the minimum level at which
reply could be sent should be that of an Under Secretary and that too in
letter form only.

60. Prompt response to letters received

(1) Each communication received from Members of Parliament, a member of
the public, a recognized association or a public body will be replied to
within 15days.

(2) Where (i) delay is anticipated in sending a final reply, or (ii) information has
to be obtained from another Ministry or another office, an interim reply will
be sent within a fortnight indicating the possible date by which a final reply
can be given.

(3) If any such communication is wrongly addressed to a department, it will be
transferred promptly(within three days) to the appropriate department
under intimation to the party concerned.

(4) Where the request of a Member of the Public cannot be acceded to for any
reason, reasons for not acceding to such a request should be given.

(5) As far as possible, requests from members of public should be looked at
from the user's point of view of what may be administratively convenient.

122. Watch on disposal of communication received from Members of
Parliament.

The personal section of each Joint Secretary/Director (if the director submits cases
direct to secretary/additional secretary) will maintain a separate register of
communications received from Members of Parliament in the form given in Appendix 45.
The serial number at which a letter is entered in this register will be prominently marked
on that letter together with its date of registration e.g., ‘‘25/JS/P/MP)’ 20.3.96

a. To keep a special watch on speedy disposal of communication received
from Members of Parliament, each section will;
i. maintain a register as in form at Appendix 46; and

ii. Make out prominently those communications finally disposed of by
rounding off the serial numbers of the register in red ink.
b. If for any reason an M.P.’s letter is received by a section without being
registered in the personal section of the Joint Secretary/Director, immediate
steps will be taken to get it registered there.

225
 c. On the 1% and 15" day of each month, each section will submit the register
along with the report in the form at Appendix 47 to the Under
Secretary/Deputy Secretary. Particulars of communications pending for
more than a fortnight will be given in the form at Appendix 48. The report,
with the remarks of Under Secretary/Deputy Secretary, will be submitted to
the Director/Joint Secretary and register will be returned to the section.

d. The personal section of the Joint Secretary/Director will check whether all
the communications entered in its register figure in the reports sent by the
sections. If any discrepancy is found, it should be reconciled. Thereafter, the
report will be submitted to the Joint Secretary/Director for scrutiny and for
such other action, as he may consider appropriate.

e. Ministries may through departmental instructions include additional columns
in the forms at Appendix 45, 46,47 and 48 to suit local needs.

2. Instructions to all Ministries/Departments of Government of India with copy to
all State Governments and LBSNAA regarding guidelines to deal with the
Members of the Parliament/State Legislatures: - The undersigned is directed to refer
to this Department O.M. No. 11013/2/92—Estt.(A) dated 21.12.92 on the subject
mentioned above wherein broad guidelines to govern dealings between the
Administration and Members of Parliament and State Legislatures have been reiterated .
The instructions emphasise that it should be the endeavour of every officer to help
Members of Parliament and State Legislatures to the extent possible in the discharge of
their functions under the Constitution. It has also been laid down that the two basic
principals to be borne in mind by the Government servants while interacting with the
Members of Parliament and State Legislatures are that (i) the Govt. servants should
show courtesy and consideration to Members of Parliament and State Legislatures; and
(ii) that while they should consider carefully or listen patiently to what the Members of
Parliament and of the State Legislatures may have to say, they should always act
according to their own best judgement.

2. The Lok Sabha Secretariat has brought to the notice of this Department that of late
complaints have been received from Hon’ble Members about non-observance by some
of the authorities of instructions/guidelines regarding courtesy to be extended to people’s
representatives in relation to public functions. The Hon’ble Speaker has directed that it is
has to be ensured that Members of Parliament are invariably apprised of the function
being held/organized in their respective parliamentary constituencies.

3. In this connection, attention of Ministries/Departments is invited to para 5 of the
instructions contained in the O.M. dated 21.12.92 wherein it has been prescribed that
Ministries/Departments should issue instructions to ensure that in a public function
organised by any of its offices in any part of the country, the Members of Parliament
/State Legislatures of the area are invariably invited and entry passes wherever
necessary, are sent to them in advance to avoid any inconvenience to them in this
regard. It has also been prescribed in these instructions that proper and comfortable
seating arrangements at public functions should be made for Members of Parliament
who appear above the officers of the rank of Secretary of Government of India in
Warrant of Precedence.

4. Ministries/Departments are requested to ensure that these instructions are followed by
all concerned in letter and spirit. It may also be impressed on all concerned that violation
of these instructions will be viewed seriously.

[O.M. No. 11013/9/96—Estt. (A) 29" October, 1996]
226
 Copy of O.M. No 11013/2/92—Estt.(A) of Government of India, Ministry of
Personnel, P.G. & Pensions (Department of Personnel & training) dated the 21-
12-92.

1. The undersigned is directed to refer to Department of Personnel & A.R. O.M.
No No. 25/19/64—Estts.(A) dated the 8" Nov., 1974 wherein broad guidelines were laid
down to govern official dealings between the Administration and the Members of
Parliament and State Legislatures. These guidelines were re-circulated on 23.6.1988
and again on 23.4.91 with the request to bring these instructions to be notice of all
concerned for strict compliance.

2. It has been noted that of late there have been cases where due and proper
courtesy was not shown to MPs/MLAs, there by inviting adverse comments. There is,
therefore, need for ensuring that proper courtesy is always shown to the members of
Parliament/State Legislatures. Therefore, it is once again reiterated that
Ministries/Departments should ensure that the guidelines contained in the O.M. dated 8"
November, 1974 are observed strictly at all levels.

3. It has further been noted that references from Committee of Parliament were
not being attended to promptly. It has, therefore, been decided that all such references
should be attended to promptly and should not be passed on routinely down the line.
Ministries/Departments should immediately identify senior officer at the level of Joint-
Secretary or equivalent who should be charged with the responsibility of ensuring that
the references are attend to promptly.

4. As regards treatment of letters received from members of Parliament/State
Legislature, attention in invited to the para 7 contained in the instruction issued by the
Government of India in 1974.

5. It has also been decided that Ministries/Departments should issue instructions
to ensure that in a public function organized by any of its officers in any part of the
country, the members of Parliament /States Legislatures of the area are invariably
invited and entry passes wherever necessary, are sent to them in advance to avoid any
inconvenience to them in this regard.

6.Ministries/Departments may also ensure that while addressing communications
to the members of Parliaments, proper protocol conforming to their position in the
Warrant of precedence (Copy enclosed) should be observed. In all official
correspondence, where the name of an MP is to appear along with others, the name
should be listed according to the position assigned to the MPs in the Warrant of
Procedure. Care should also be taken to address each of them as member of Parliament
(or MP) and not as Member of Parliament of Rajya Sabha. If it is desired to be more
specific about the House to which they belong they may be addressed as Member of
Parliament of MP(Lok Sabha)/(Rajya Sabha).

7. With a view to ensuring that these instructions are scrupulously followed by all
concerned, it is necessary that these instructions are made available to all the Offices
preferably in local languages.

8. It may please be ensured that these instructions are followed by all concerned
in letter and spirit. It may also be emphasized on all concerned that a serious note will be
taken of any violation of these instructions.

227
 Copy of O.M. No. 25/19/64—Estt(A) of Government of India/Cabinet
Secretariat/Department of Personnel & Administrative Reforms dated the 8”
November, 1974.

1. The undersigned is directed to state that Members of Parliament and State
Legislature occupy in our democratic set-up a very important place as accredited
representatives of the people. They have important functions to perform under the
Constitution and they may occasionally find it necessary to seek information form the
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India or the State Governments, of make
suggestions for their consideration or ask for interview with Officers in connection with
their parliamentary and allied public duties. In this connection, certain well-recognized
principle and conventions to govern the relations between Members of Parliament and of
State Legislatures and Government Servants have already been established. These
principles and conventions were communicated in Ministry of Home Affairs (new
Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms) Office Memorandum No.
25/29/56—Estts (A) dated the 28" August, 1957 and ) Office Memorandum No.
25/6/68—Estts (A) dated the 27" March, 1968. copies enclosed as Enclosure—I and II
respectively. However, on a review of the position it has been considered necessary to
reiterate, and to spell out in some detail, the principles and practices that should govern
the relations between Members of Parliament and State Legislature and Government
servants. The instructions in this regard are contained in the subsequent paragraphs.
The Ministry of Finance etc. are requested to bring the contains of this Office
Memorandum to the notice of all concerned for guidance and strict compliance.

2. The two basic principles to be borne in mind are (i) that Government servants
should show courtesy and consideration of Members of Parliament and of the State
Legislatures and (ii) that while they should consider carefully or listen patently to what
the Member of Parliament and of State Legislatures may have to say, they should
always act according to their own best judgment.

3. It should be the endeavour of every Officer to help the Members of Parliament
and of State Legislatures to the extent possible in the discharge of their important
functions under the Constitution. In cases, however, where an officer in unable to
accede to the request or suggestion of a Member, the reasons for his inability to do so
should be courteously explained to the member.

4. It is realize that many officers have very heavy public duties and
responsibilities and if they are to function effectively they should be permitted to plan out
their day’s work with some care and adhere to the plan. An officer should feel free to set
apart some hour when he can refuse to meet visitors without being considered guilty of
discourtesy, lack of consideration and the like. He should, however, set apart some time
every day when anybody can see him and, within these hours and also during other
office hours in which he is to meet visitors, he must give priority to Members of
Parliament and of State Legislatures except when a visitors has come by previous
appointment and a Member of Parliament of a State Legislature his come without an
appointment. In such a case he should see the Member of Parliament or of a State
Legislature immediately after he has met the visitor who had come by previous
appointment. Any deviation from an appointment made with a Member of Parliament or
of a State Legislature or indeed with any Member concerned so that the least possible
inconvenience is caused to him and a fresh appointment should be fixed in consultation
with him.

228
 5. When a Member of Parliament or of a State Legislature comes to see him, an
officer should rise in his seat to receive the Member and to see him off. Small gestures
have symbolic value and officers should, therefore, be meticulously correct and
courteous in their dealing with Members of Parliament and of State Legislatures.

6. Similarly, seating arrangement at public functions should be ensured that there
is no room for any misunderstanding on this score. The position of Members of
Parliament has been clearly brought out in the warrant of procedure approved by the
President. M.Ps. appear at Article 30 above officers of the rank of full Central or
equivalent, Secretaries to the Government of India, etc. The instructions appended to
the Warrant of precedence also lay down that when Members of Parliament are invited
en bloc to major State functions, the enclosure reserved for them should be next to the
Governors, Chief Justice, Speaker of the Lokl Sabha, Ambassadors, etc. A further
provision in the instructions is that the Members of State Legislatures who, owing to their
presence in Delhi happen to be invited to State functions, should be assigned rank just
after Member of Parliament. To convenience to Members of Parliament and of seats
meant for them should be kept reserved till end of the function and should not be
occupied by other persons, even though they may be vacant. The seats provided for
them should be at least as comfortable and as prominently placed as those for officials.

7. Letters received from Members of Parliament and of State Legislatures should
be acknowledged promptly. All such letters should receive careful consideration and
should be responded to at an appropriate level and expeditiously. The officers should
furnish to Members of Parliament and of State Legislatures when asked for, such
information or statistics relating to matters of local importance as are readily available
and are not confidential. In doubtful cases instructions should be taken from a higher
authority before refusing request.

8. While the official dealings of Government servants with Members of Parliament
and of State Legislature have to be regulated as stated in the previous paragraphs, it is
necessary to invite the attention of Government servants to what is expected of them in
their individual capacity in respect of their own grievances in the matter of conditions of
service. Under the relevant Conduct Rules governing them, Government servants are
prohibited from bringing or attempting to bring any, political or other influence to bear
upon any superior authority to further their interests in respect of matters pertaining to
their service under the Government. Therefore, a Government servants is not expected
to approach a Member of Parliament or of a State Legislature for sponsoring his
individual case.

Copy Ministry of Home Affairs(now Department of Personnel & Administrative
Reforms), Office Memorandum No. 25/29/56—Estt. (A) dated the 28" August,
1957.—(Enclosure—I)

1. It has been brought to the notice of the Government by certain Members of
Parliament that instances have occurred in which Members of Legislatures have not
been accorded by Government officers the consideration and regard which their position
in the public life of the country requires. Government of India have no doubt that, lapses,
if any, in this respect cannot be intentional, and that there in no desire to be discourteous
or rude. Nevertheless, Government of India would like to remind all officers that due
courtesy and regard to the representatives of the people are desirable in the larger
interests of the country. The Members of Parliament have important functions to perform
under the Constitution and it should be the endeavour of every officer to help them to
the extent possible in the discharge of their functions. In cases, however, when officers

229
 are unable to accede to the request or suggestions of Members of Parliament, the
reasons for the office’s inability to do so should be courteously explained to them. For
purposes of interview, Members of Parliament should be given preference over other
visitors, and in the very rare cases where an officer is unable to see a Member of
Parliament at a time about which he had no previous notice, the position should be
politely explained to the Member and another appointment fixed in consultation with him.
The same courtesy and regard should be shown to Members of Legislatures attending
public functions where, in particular, seats befitting their position should be reserved for
them.

2. Ministry of Finance etc. are requested to bring these instructions to the notice
of all concerned.

Copy of O.M. No. 25/6/68—Estt(A) dated 27.3.1968.(Enclosure—I|)

1. As the Ministry of Finance etc. are aware, instructions were issued on
28.8.57(Vide copy enclosed) emphasizing the need for observance of proper courtesies
by officers of the Govt. in their dealings with Members of Parliament. In continuation of
these instructions, it is further emphasized that where any meeting convened by Govt. is
to be attended by Members of Parliament, special care should be taken to see that
notice is given to them in good time regarding the date, time venue etc. of the meeting,
and it should be ensured that there is no slip in any matter of detail, however minor it
may be.

2. Ministry of Finance etc. are requested to bring the above instructions to the
notice of all concerned.
PRESIDENT’S SECRETARIAT
No. 33—Pres/79 dated the 26" July, 1979.
a. In suppression of all previous notifications issued on the subject, the
following Table, with respect to the rank and precedence of the persons

named therein which has been approved by the President, is published for
general information:

1. President
Vice President
Prime Minister

Governors of States within their respective States

aor ON

Former Presidents
5(A) Deputy Prime Minister
6. Chief Justice of India.
Speaker of the Lok Sabha
(7) Cabinet Ministers of the Union.
Chief Ministers of States within their respective States
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission

Former Prime Ministers.

230
 Leaders of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha.

7(A) Holders of the Bharat Ratna Decoration

8

10

11.

12.
13.
14.

415:

16.

17.

18.

Ambassadors Extraordinary and _ Plenipotentiary and High
Commissioners of Commonwealth countries accredited to India.

Chief Ministers of States outside their respective States/Governor of
States outside their respective States.

Judges of Supreme Court

. Chief Election Commissioner

Comptroller & Auditor General of India.
Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha
Deputy Chief Ministers of States
Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha

Members of the Planning Commission

Ministers of State of the Union and other Minister in the Ministry of
Defence for defence matters.

Attorney General of India.

Cabinet Secretary

Lieutenant Governors within their respective Union Territories.

Chiefs of Staff holding the rank of full General or Equivalent rank
Envoys Extraordinary and Ministers Plenipotentiary accredited to India.

Chairman and Speakers of State Legislatures within their respective
States

Chief Justice of High Courts within their respective jurisdictions.
Cabinet Ministers in States within their respective States.
Chief Ministers of Union Territories and

Chief Executive Councillor, Delhi, within their respective Union
Territories, Deputy Ministers of the Union

Officiating Chief of Staff holding the rank of Lieutenant General or
equivalent rank.

Chairman, Central Administrative Tribunal

Chairman, Minorities Commission

Chairman, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Commission
Chairman, Union Public Service Commission

Chief Justices of High Courts outside their respective jurisdictions.
Puisne Judges of High Courts within their respective jurisdictions.
Cabinet Ministers in States outside their respective States.

231
 19.

20.

21.
22.
23.

Chairman, and Speakers of State Legislatures outside their respective
States.

Chairman, Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission.

Deputy Chairman and Deputy Speaker of State legislature within their
respective States.

Ministers of States in States within their respective States

Ministers of Union Territories and Executive Councillors, Delhi, within
their respective Union Territories.

Speakers of Legislative Assemblies in Union Territories and Chairman
of Delhi Metropolitan Council within their respective Union Territories.

Chief Commissioner of Union Territories not having Councils of
Ministers, within their respective States.

Deputy Ministers in States within their respective States.

Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assemblies in Union Territories and
Deputy Chairman, of Metropolitan Council, Delhi, within their respective
Union Territories.

Deputy Chairman and Deputy Speaker of States Legislatures, outside
their States.

Ministers of State in, States outside their States

Puisne Judge of High Courts outside their respective jurisdictions.
Member of Parliament

Deputy Ministers in their States outside their respective States.

Army Commanders/Vice Chief of the Army Staff or equivalent in other
Services.

Chief Secretaries to State Governments within their respective States.
Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities.

Commissioner for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Members, Minorities Commission.

Member, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Commission.
Member, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Commission
Officers of the rank of full General or equivalent rank

Secretaries to the Government of India (including officers holding this
office ex-officio)

Secretary, Minorities Commission

Secretary, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Commission
Secretary, to the President

Secretary to the Prime Minister

Secretary, Rajya Sabha, Lok Sabha

232
 Solicitor General
Vice-Chairman, Central Administrative Tribunal
24. Officers of the rank of Lieutenant General or equivalent rank.
25. Additional Secretaries to the Government of India.
Additional Solicitor General
Advocate General's of States.
Chairman, Tariff Commission
Charges Affairs and Acting High Commissioners a pied and ad interim.

Chief Ministers of Union Territories and Chief Executive Councillor,
Delhi, outside their respective Union Territories.

Chief Secretaries of States Governments outside their respective
States.

Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General

Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assemblies in Union Territories and
Deputy Chairman, Delhi Metropolitan Council, outside their respective
Union Territories.

Director, Central Bureau of Investigation

Director, General, Central Reserve Police.

Director, Intelligence Bureau.

Lieutenant Governors outside their respective Union Territories.
Members, Central Administrative Tribunal.

Members, Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission
Members, Union Public Service Commission

Ministers of Union Public Territories and Executive Councillor, Delhi,
outside their respective Union Territories.

Principal Staff officers of the Armed Forces of the rank of Major
General or equivalent rank

Speaker of Legislative Assemblies in Union Territories and Chairman of
Delhi Metropolitan Council, outside their respective Union Territories.

26. Joint Secretaries to the Government of India and Officers of equivalent
rank.

Officers of the rank of Major-General or equivalent rank.

Note 1—The order in this Table of Precedence is meant for State and Ceremonial
occasions and has no application in the day-to-day business of
Government.

Note 2—Persons in the Table of Precedence will take rank in order of the number
of the articles. The entries in the same article are arranged alphabetically.
Those included in the same article will take precedence inter se according
to date of entry into that article. However, where the dignitaries of
different States and Union Territories included in the same article are

233
 present at function outside their States or Union Territories and there in
difficulty in ascertaining their dates of entry, they may be assigned
precedence inter se in the alphabetical order of the name of States and
Union Territories concerned after those whose precedence is determined
according to date of entry into that article.

NoTe 3—In Article 7, the former Prime Ministers will take precedence over the
Cabinet Ministers of the Union and the Leaders of Opposition in the Rajya
Sabha and the Lok Sabha. The Chief Ministers of States within their
respective States will take precedence over the Cabinet Ministers of the
Union of official functions held in the respective States.

NoteE4 — In Article 8—

(a) Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary and High
Commissioners of Commonwealth countries accredited to India
will en bloc rank above Governors of State outside their respective
States.

(b) Governors of States outside respective States will en bloc rank
above chief Ministers of States outside their respective States.

Note 5—The Ministry of External Affairs may assign appropriate ranks to foreign
dignitaries and Indian Ambassadors, High Commissioners and Ministers
Plenipotentiary during their visit to India.

Note 6— Notwithstanding the procedure laid down in Note 2, the rank inter se and
precedence of the persons in Article 10 shall be assigned in the following
order: —

1. Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
2. Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha

3. Ministers of State of Union and any other Minister in the Ministry of
Defence for defence matters,

4. Deputy Chief Ministers of States.

5. Members of the Planning Commission However, the Deputy Chief
Ministers of States outside their respective States will always rank
below all other dignitaries figuring in this article.

Note 7— The Chairman of State Legislative Councils will rank above the Speakers
of Legislative Assemblies in case where they were elected on the same
date.

Note 8—When Members of Parliaments are invited en block to major State
functions, the enclosures reserved for them should be next to the Chief
Justice, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Ambassadors etc.

Note 9— Speakers of Legislative Assemblies in Union Territories and Chairman of
the Delhi Metropolitan Council, Delhi, will take precedence over Ministers
and Executive Councillors, included in the same article.

Note 10. In Article 23—

234
 (a) Secretaries in the Ministry of External Affairs other than the Foreign
Secretary between themselves, will take precedence in the order of
their seniority in Grade | of the Indian Foreign Service and both of
them will take precedence after the Foreign Secretary;

(b) Member of the Minorities Commission and the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes Commission will always take precedence
over the Secretaries of these Commissions;

(c) In official functions held at  Delhi/New Delhi, Army
Commanders/Vice Chief of the Army Staff or equivalent in other
Services will always rank after Secretaries to the Government of
India.

Note 11— In Article 25—

(a) Additional Secretaries in the Ministry of External Affairs among
themselves will take Precedence in the order of their seniority in
Grade II of the Indian Foreign Service;

(b) Additional Solicitor General will take precedence above the
Advocate Generals of States;

(c) | Lieutenant Governors will take precedence over the Chief Ministers
and Chief Executive Councillor, Delhi, and the latter will take
precedence over Speakers of Legislative Assemblies and
Chairman , Metropolitan Council, Delhi;

(d) Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assemblies of Union Territories and
Deputy Chairman of Delhi Metropolitan Council will take
precedence after Ministers of Union Territories and Executive
Councillors, Delhi.

NoTe 12—For the purpose of Article 26, the posts equivalent to the posts of Joint
Secretaries to the Government of India will be determined by the Ministry
of Home Affairs.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 3

1. Participation in proselytising activities may be treated as good and sufficient
reason for taking disciplinary action against a moS: - A question was raised whether
members of the Service were prohibited from taking part in proselytising activities under
these Rules. The Government of India have decided that although, under the
Constitution of India, servants of the States are entitled in their private lives to profess,
practice or propagate any religion freely, they should so conduct themselves in public as
to leave no room for an impression that they are likely in their official dealings to favours
persons belonging to any particular religion. Such an impression is bound to arise in
respect of a member, who participates in bringing about or organizing conversions from
one religion to another and such conduct would be even more reprehensible if, in the
process, he makes use, directly or indirectly, of his official position or influence.

235
 2. Although a specific provision in this regard is not made in these Rules, participation in
proselytising activities may be treated as good and sufficient reason for taking
disciplinary action against a member under the All India Service (Discipline and Appeal)
Rules, 1955.

3. The provisions contained in the proceeding paragraph may be kept in view by the
State Governments, while examining the conduct of members of the Service in this
regard.

[G.I., M.H.A. letter No.(IS)503/58-AIS(III), dated 30th May, 1958, read with
O.M. No. 25/50/57-Esst.(A), dated 15" January, 1958-M.H.A. F.No.16/39/58-AIS(III)].

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 5

1. Permission should not be given to a moS to publish articles in the journals,
souvenirs etc., of political parties: - A doubt has been raised whether members of the
All India Services can be permitted to publish articles in the journals, souvenirs etc., of
political parties.

2. The matter has been examined in this Department and it has been decided, that in all
such cases, permission should not be given.

[DP&T letter No. 11017/30/93 AIS (Ill), dated 21/06/93]

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 10

1. A moS may be permitted to participate in Flag Day Collection: - According to Rule
10 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, no member of the service shall
except with the previous sanction of the Government or such authority as may be
empowered by it in this behalf ask for or accept contributions to or otherwise associate
himself with the raising of any funds or other collections in cash or any kind or in
pursuance of any object whatever. For the purpose of this rule, Government in the case
of the member of the service serving in connection with the affairs of the Union is the
Central Government and in the case of a member of the service serving in connection
with the affairs of State the Government of that State.

2. A question was raised whether members of All India Services may be permitted to
associate themselves with the raising of funds in connection with the Armed Force Flag
Day. So far as the Central Government servants are concerned, Government of India
has decided to relax the provision of the Rule 12 of the CCS (conduct) Rules and to
allow Central Government servants to participate in such collections on voluntary basis,
keeping in view the object underlying the Flag Day Collection, vide Ministry of Home
Affairs’ Memo. No. 25/33/55—Estt., dated 31st October, 1955.

3. It was decided to extend the provisions of the Ministry of Home Affairs Memorandum
cited above to the members of the All India Services serving under the Central
Government.

4. The State Governments were requested to consider adopting the same policy in
respect of the members of All India Services working under them.

[DP & AR letter No. 11017/80/82—AIS(III), dated 16-11-82.]

236
 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 11

1. The criteria to decide acceptance of gift my a moS or his members of the family
is whether it is inspired by his official position: - The main criteria to be followed in
deciding whether a member of the Service or a member of his family, should be
permitted to retain a gift would be whether it has been inspired by his official position and
also whether it is likely to embarrass or influence him, either immediately or
prospectively in the discharge of his official duties.

[G.I. M.H.A. letter No. 7/15/56—AIS (II), dated 10th April, 1956].

2. No officer should be given permission to accept gifts of more than trifling value,
at the time of transfer: - Instances have come to the notice of the Government in which
senior officers and others were presented, on the occasion of their retirement or transfer
expensive gifts for the purchase of which the members of staff contributed. Though
farewell entertainment of substantially private and informal character may be held in the
honour of officers on the eve of their retirement or transfer, yet it is hardly healthy or
desirable to allow the practice of accepting gifts from the staff. It has, therefore, been
decided that in future no officer should be given permission to accept gifts of more than
trifling value, at the time of transfer.

2. There is, however, no objection to the officer's accepting gifts at the time of his
retirement from members of the staff subject however to prior permission of Government
wherever such permission is necessary.

3. The State Government may, if there be no objection follow these instructions while
dealing with the similar cases of officers serving in connection with the affairs of the
State.

[G.I. M.H.A. letter No. 8/51/62—AIS(III), dated 30" November 1962]

3. Procedure for disposal of presents received by a moS by visiting foreign
dignitaries: - The Government of India have decided that presents made to members of
the Service by visiting foreign ‘dignitaries’ as distinguished from ‘foreigners’ shall be
disposed of in the following manner:—

(i) Presents, which are of a symbolic and not of any practical value, like
swords ceremonial robes etc., may be retained by the recipients;

(ii) Presents of trivial value, which for this purpose shall be *Rs. 3000/
may be retained by the recipients; and

(iii) Presents not covered by the above two categories shall be deposited
at the Government Toshakhanna (in the Ministry of External Affairs),
from where the recipients may be given the option to purchase them
at prices fixed by the authorities in charge.

[G.|. M.H.A/ letter No. 25/49/55—Estt., dated 31st March, 1956, read with Dep’t. of
Personnel and A.R. letter No. 5/28/73—AIS—(IIl), dated 10-1-1974 and No.
11017/55/76—AIS (lll), dated 8-12-1976]

4. Presents received by a moS from foreign firms will also be covered under the
procedure above: - A question has been raised whether the instructions contained in
letter No. 5/28/73—AlIS (Ill), dated 10-1-1974 could be applied in the case of gifts
received by members of the service from foreign firms.

2. This question has been carefully considered in this department. According to the
normal policy no permission is granted, save in exceptional circumstances, for

237
 acceptance of gifts made to members of the services by firms, whether foreign or
indigenous, with whom the members of the service concerned has had or has or is likely
to have official dealings, either directly or indirectly by virtue of his official position.
Permission should also not be normally granted for the acceptance of gifts by members
of the All India Services from firms, which are contracting firms with the Government
even if the contract is entered into by Ministry of Department other than one in or under
which the member of the service concerned is serving. The question of grant of
permission for acceptance of gifts from a foreign firm would, therefore, normally arise
only in those cases where the foreign firms concerned is neither a firm contracting with
the Government where it is proposed to grant permission for acceptance of the gifts
made by a foreign firm the procedure laid down in this department letter of even number
dated 10-1-1974 referred to above should be followed.

[D.P. & A.R. letter No. 5/28/73—AlS (Il), dated 22-10-1975].

5. Procedure for contacts with business firms: - | am directed to invite attention to
sub-rule (4) of Rule 11 of AIS (Conduct) Rules, 1968 and to forward herewith a copy of
this Department's office Memorandum No. 11013/1/88—Estt. (A) dated the 10" May, 88
on the subject mentioned above. | am further directed to say that the instructions
stipulated therein shall apply mutatis mutandis to members of the All India Services also.

2. It is requested that the above instructions may be brought to the notice of the
members of the All India Services serving in the State/Central Government of the
Compliance

[Letter No. 11017/25/88—AIS(III) dated 12-7-1988]

Copy of O.M. No. 11013/1/88—Estt.(A) dated 10.5.88 of Government of India,
Ministry of Personnel, P.G. & Pensions, Department of Personnel & Training

1. The undersigned is directed to invite attention to Note (Il) below Rule 13(l) of
the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964 which lays down that a Government
servant shall avoid accepting lavish hospitality or frequent hospitality from any
commercial firms, organizations etc. Rule 4(3) of the CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964 inter-
alia envisages that no Government servant shall in the discharge of his official duties
deal with any matter concerning any company of firm of any other person if he or any
member of his family is interested in such matter in any manner. These instruction have
been issued to ensure that Government servants are extremely careful and discreet
while coming in contact which businessmen and business firms so as to avoid situations,
which might cause embarrassment to the Government or to the Government servants
concerned, while dealing with matters relating to those business firms/businesses in
their official capacity.

2. It may sometimes so happen that a Government servant is required to
maintain contact with outsiders to gain information, in the public interest, about the
violation of rules, regulations etc. In such cases the Government servant concerned has
to exercise adequate care and discretion in making use of such outside contacts so that
neither the Government nor the Government servant personally becomes obliged or
committed to the said contact in any manner.

3. The aforesaid instructions are brought to the notice of all Ministries/
Departments for strict compliance by Government servants of all categories.

238
 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 12

1. The members of the Services should refrain from declaring building etc. open
and should take prior permission if necessary: - A question was raised whether it
would be in consonance with the spirit of this rule for members of the Service to accept
invitations to declare buildings, etc. open, or to lay the foundation-stones of new
buildings, or to allow bridges, road, buildings, parks or public institutions such as
hospitals, schools or colleges be named after them. The Government of India have
decided that it would not only be against the spirit of this rule, for members of the
Service to act in the manner set forth above, but it would be inappropriate and
inconsistent with the rule of detached impartiality legitimately expected of them and that
it would generally have an unwholesome effect.

2. While it is possible that there may be occasion when members may have to
participate in such functions, which have a cultural or sociological significance especially
in remote areas, they should, as far as possible refrain from associating themselves with
such functions. In cases, where they are in doubt, they would be well advised to take the
prior permission of their superior officers.

3. The State Government may issue similar orders in respect of members of the Service
serving under them.

[M.H.A. letter No. 6/79/57—AIS(Il), dated 28th October, 1957 read with O.M. No.
25/24/57—Estt.(A) dated 16-9-1957].

2. The members of the Services should not accept awards conferred by private
organisations: - This Department has been receiving references from various
Ministries/Departments recommending grant of Awards from organisations of National/
International repute and also from Private Bodies, to members of All India Services.

2. In this connection, | am directed to invite the attention of all Ministries/Departments to
the clarification issued in this Department's letter No.11017/48/93-AIS(III) dated 20"
October, 1993 and to say that it is not appropriate for members of All India Services to
accept awards from Private Bodies.

{DOPT Letter No.11017/71-93-AlS(IIl) dated 9"" August, 1994]

Copy of the DOPT Letter No.11017/48/93-AIS(IIl) dated 20" October, 1993
regarding acceptance of awards conferred by private organisations.

1. As per rule 12(1) of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, a member of the
Service is required to take the previous sanction of Government, which may be subject
to such conditions and provisions as may be specified therein, before receiving any
complimentary or valedictory address or testimonial or attending any meeting or
entertainment held in his honour. While there is no specific rule regarding the
acceptance of awards conferred on officers by private organisations, however, the policy
of the Government has been that if a government servant has done any outstanding
work, there are various methods open to Government themselves to recognise his
merits and service and it would not be appropriate for him to accept such an award from
a private body. In some isolated cases, however, the acceptance of awards was not
objected to where the body giving the award was highly respected and the award did not
include any monetary component.

2. It is relevant to point out that the activities of the Government extend over wide
ranging fields, some of which are well publicised and some are not; this could lead to an
unintended preference in recognition for persons engaged in the former category which

239
 is not desirable. Some of the bodies which institute awards may also be involved in
activities which may prove embarrassing for Government. Moreover, it has been
accepted that a civil servant should not strive to seek publicity or public recognition since
his job is to act in a fair manner within the framework of the policy laid down by the
political executive; seeking awards instituted by private bodies can affect such
functioning. Finally, the achievement which may be attributed to a public servant or
member of the Service is almost always a result of coordinated efforts and thinking by a
number of individuals and not the achievement of one person alone. Therefore, it is felt
that, in general, awards sought to be given by private bodies and institutes to members
of the Services do not need to be encouraged. In case there are exceptional
circumstances like rewarding the merit of an officer for work done outside the purview of
his functions in government or where Government otherwise thinks that an individual
deserves a particular award, it is left to the discretion of the competent authority to
decide such issues in a reasonable and judicious manner.

3. The main criteria which may be followed in granting permission to individual
officers to accept awards from private organisations is that such awards should not have
a monetary component. The competent authority must also take their decisions on a
case-to-case basis since instructions cannot precisely encompass the multitude of
possibilities that can crop up in such matters.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 13

1. Income from literary, cultural or artistic efforts, which are not aided by the
knowledge acquired by the member in the course of his service, is not ‘fee’ for the
purpose of SR 12 and can be retained by the officer in full: - A question arose,
whether a member of the service could accept royalty of the publication of a book of
literary, artistic, or scientific character and also whether such royalties were to be treated
as ‘Fee’ under supplementary Rule 12. It has been decided that the income from literary,
cultural or artistic efforts, which are not aided by the knowledge acquired by the member
in the course of his service, is not ‘fee’ for the purpose of SR 12 and can be retained by
the member of Service in full. In other cases, SR 12 will apply and one - third of any fee
in excess of Rs. 1500/- paid to a member of Service in a financial year shall be credited
to the Consolidate Fund of India/State.

[G.I.DOPT letter No. 11017/02/2015-AlS(IIl), dated 14.08.2015]

2. There is nothing in this rule prohibiting a member of the Service from becoming
a member of any Co-operative Society.

[G.1. M.H.A. letter No. 8/50/61—AIS(III), dated 29th November, 1961]

3. Members of the Services are not permitted to act as a sleeping partner: -
Instances have come to the notice or the Government of India, when members of the
service sought permission to continue, as a sleeping partner to keep their interests alive
in the joint family concern or otherwise. As a rule the Government are averse to the
continued association of an all India Service Officer with a commercial firm in his own
State of Allotment.

[G.I. M.H.A. letter No. 8/6/63—AlS (III), dated the 15th May, 1963].

4. Members of the Services may be discouraged to hold Elective posts in
University Senate: - Seeking election to a University Senate is neither in the scheme of
social nor literary work. In fact the work of the University Senate itself cannot be

240
 regarded as of social, or literary character. In a large number of Universities, elections to
the Senate are hotly contested by nominees of the major political parties and the senate
bodies are considered another forum for political activity.

2. In view of the considerations mentioned above it has been decided that elective post
of the nature referred to above should not be held by the members of the All India
Services and that they may be discouraged from seeking such election.

[M.H.A. letter No. 8/88/65—AIS(III), dated 8-12-1965].

5. Power of the Central Government to grant previous sanction under rule 13(1)
has not been delegated to the Central Ministries/Departments: - Rule 13(1) of All
India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 as amended by this Department's Notification No.
5/23/72—AlS (Ill), dated, the 27" July, 1974 provides that no member of the service
shall except with the previous sanction of the Government, engage directly or indirectly
in any trade or business or negotiate for or undertake any employment. The powers of
the Central Government under this rule are exercisable by the Department of Personnel
and Administrative Reforms, as these powers have not been delegated to the
administrative Ministries/Departments. The Ministry of Finance etc. are therefore,
requested to ensure that proposals for grant of permission under this rule to the
members of the All India Services working in, or under, them are invariably referred to
this Department for prior concurrence.

[Department of Personnel and A.R. O.M. No. 11017/3/75—AlS (Ill), dated 9-4-1975].

6. State Governments are not competent to nominate or appoint any member of
the AIS on Central deputation to any executive or semi-executive positions under
the State Government without the specific approval of the Central Government: -
Instances have come to notice where members of All India Services while on Central
deputation have been nominated/appointed to specific executive semi-executive
positions under the State Governments. Not only does this practise create avoidable
embarrassment, it is also contrary to the rules. According to sub-rule (1) rule 13 of the
AlS(Conduct) Rules read with clause (a) of rule 12 ibid no member of the Service
serving in connection with the affairs of the Union, or serving under a foreign
Government or outside India whether on duty or on leave, shall, except with the previous
sanction of the Central Government undertake any employment under a State
Government. In view of these provisions State Government are not competent to
nominate or appoint any member of the AIS on Central deputation to any executive or
semi-executive positions under the State Government without the specific approval of
the Central Government. The concurrence of the Central Government cannot be
presumed. The basic assumption is that the entire time of a Government servant,
particularly a senior one, should be available to the Central or State Government
depending on where he is working. Moreover, it is necessary that while an officer is
serving in the Government of India, he is not subject to any kind of control by a State
Government.

2. If an officer in a State Government is holding certain positions in the State, it is not
necessary that he should continue to do so, even when he comes on deputation to the
Centre. For one thing, he will be able to devote the same time which he may have done
while he was in the State and this may be against the interest of the institution(s) with
which he was associated. For another, such step may tend to cause demoralization
amongst officers in the State as it implies that there is no one competent enough to take
over the responsibility.

241
 3. For the above reasons, it has been decided that, as a matter of principle, members of
the All India Services who are serving at the Centre will not be permitted to occupy
executive or semi-executive position under a State Government or Public sector
organisation etc. controlled by the State Government except, where they are nominated
by the Central Government to represent the interests of that Government.

[DPAR letter No. 11017/10/78—AIS (Ill), dated 20-7-1978].

7. Details of the trade or business, the family members of the moS is engaged in,
should invariably be furnished: - Under sub-rule (3) or rule 13 or the All India Service
(Conduct) Rules, 1968, every member of the Service shall, if any member of his family is
engaged in a trade or business, or owns or manages an insurance agency or
commission agency, report that fact to the Government. It is, however, noticed that in a
number of cases in the past, members of the All India Services did not furnish details
relating to the trade/business started by their family members while making their reports
to the Government under the aforesaid sub-rule with the result that Government had no
information in this regard. Hereafter whenever a report is made by a member of the All
India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, elementary details like nature of and name under
which trade/business is being done, its location, whether with or without partners,
amount invested and the source of the amount invested etc. should invariably be
furnished.

[G.I., M.H.A., DP&AR letter No. 11017/15/79—AIS(III), dated the 30" July, 1979]

8. A moS should not stand guarantee/surety for loans taken by their relatives for
business purposes: - A question was raised whether an All India Service Officer can
stand surety/guarantee to a loan being taken by his wife for business purposes.

2. It has been clarified that members of the All India Service should not stand
guarantee/surety for loans taken by their relatives for business purposes as in this way
indirect interest in business and financial commitments are created attracting the
provisions of Rules 13 and 15 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968.

[G.I.DP&AR letter No. 11017/46/82—AlIS(III), dated 4" September, 1982]

9. A moS can enrol with bar association with a condition that he should not
engage in legal profession while in government service: - A question has arisen
whether a member of an All India Services could enrol himself with bar association. It
has been decided that a member an All India Services can be permitted to enrol himself
as an advocate, on condition that he should not engage himself in the legal profession
either independently or otherwise for so long as he continues in Government Services.

[DP&T No. 11017/55/92 AIS(III), dated 22/12/92]

10. Secretaries of the Government of India should not associate themselves with
Boards of Public Sector Undertakings: - Instances have come to the notice of the
Government in which the Secretaries of the Government of India have associated
themselves with the Public Sector Undertakings, as members of their Board of Directors.

2. The matter has been carefully considered in this Department and with the approved of
Prime Minister, Secretaries to Government need not be appointed to the Boards of
Public Sector Undertakings or in such companies with which Public Sector Undertakings
are intimately involved.

[DP&T Letter No. 11017/11/93—AIS(III) dated 12.7.93]

11. A moS should obtain prior permission of the Government before negotiating
for consultancies and other appointments: - Under Rule 13(1) (b) of the

242
 AlS(Conduct) Rules 1968 the members of All India Services are required to obtain prior
permission of the Government before they negotiate for, or undertake, any other
employment.

2. It has come to the notice of the Government of India that some members of AIS have
taken up consultancies and other appointments without obtaining the prior permission of
the Government. The matter has, been viewed seriously and it is again reiterated that
members of All India Services should not negotiate for, or undertake, any other
employment without the previous sanction of the Government.

3. It is requested that this may be brought to the notice of all the members of the All India
Service, and that all the State Governments should maintain strict control in this matter.

[Letter no. 11017/52/93—AIS(II) dated 2.12.94]

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 6 AND RULE 13(4)

1. There is no objection to radio broadcasts or contributions to newspapers,
periodicals, etc. on matter relating to sports being made by members of the
Service without prior sanction of the Government.

[G.I. M.H.A. letter No. 7/23/56—AlS II, dated 27th April, 1956]

2. State Governments can permit a moS to submit thesis for Ph.D. etc. if there are
not likely to interfere his due discharge of duties: - A question arose, whether
members of the Service can be permitted to submit thesis for Ph.D. etc., the Govt. of
India advised that the State Governments themselves could decide each individual case
on merits. If the State Government are satisfied that the proposed course of studies is
not likely to Interfere with the efficient discharge of officer's duties, they may, at their
discretion, permit the officer.

[G.l. M.H.A. F. No. 8/76/62—AIS(III) dated]

3. Sanction of the Government is not necessary for publication of books/articles
of literary, artistic or scientific character: - Sanction of the Government is not
necessary for publication of a book or article by a member of the service if the ‘work’ is
of literary, artistic or scientific character and is not aided by his official duties but the
officer should take care that in publishing the book he does not contravene provisions of
rule 6 or any other provisions of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968.

2. Provisions of S.R. 12 are also not attracted in such cases.
[G.I. M.H.A. F. No. 8/35/62—AIS(III)]

5. Prior sanction of the Government is necessary under rule 13(4) for accepting
remuneration for publication of books/articles of purely literary, artistic or
scientific character, though permission is not required for their publication under
rule 6: - According to rule 6 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, a member
of an All India service is not required to obtain the previous sanction of the Government
for publishing a book or for contributing an article to a newspaper, periodical etc. If the
subject matter of the book or contribution is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific
character and, in the case of a book, it is published through a publisher. A question has
been raised as to whether in such cases a member of an All India Service should obtain
the sanction of the Government for accepting remuneration for such publication.

2. Sub-rule (4) of rule 13 ibid provides that no member of an al India Service shall accept
any fee for any work done for any public body on for any private person without the
sanction of the Government. This provision is independent of the provision contained in

243
 rule 6. As such even though a member of an All India Service is not required to obtain
the sanction of the Government for publishing a book etc. on a purely literary artistic or
scientific subject he has to obtain the sanction of the Government for accepting any
remuneration, for the work from a source other than the Consolidated Fund of India or
the Consolidated Fund of a State. Similarly, in cases where a member of an All India
Services, is required to obtain the sanction of the Government, under rule 6, for the
publication of the book etc. the sanction under rule 6, does not automatically imply
sanction of the Government under sub-rule (4) of rule 13, and, in cases where the
provisions of the sub-rule are attracted, specific sanction there under is necessary.

3. The question whether any portion of the fee, received for the work, should be credited
to the Government, is to be decided in accordance with Supplementary Rule 12, as far
as the members of and All India Service serving in connection with the affairs of the
Union are concerned. In the case of a member of an I.A.S. serving in connection with the
affairs of a State, this matter may be regulated by the rules, regulations and orders,
applicable to the members of the State Civil Service Class | of that State.

(Department of Personnel and A.R. No. 5/4/73—AIS(IIl), dated 27-4-73).

5. Greater care/discretion should be taken about the provisions of the Official
Secrets Act, 1923, while giving permission to serving/retired officers to publish
books/articles: - |t has been brought to the notice of the Government that some retired
officers have published books/articles, which revealed sensitive information on certain
operation pertaining to the security of the State/having a bearing on the sovereignty and
integrity of India. It has also been noted that such disclosures are not only likely to
embarrass the Govt. and the officers concerned, whose names has been revealed, but
they are also likely to perilously affect cordial and friendly relations with foreign States.
Administrative Ministries/ Departments/Authorities should very carefully and critically
review such instances and ensure that necessary follow-up action as envisaged in the
Official Secrets Act, 1923/relevant Pension Rules governing the conditions of pension of
retired Govt. servants, are taken in time, as and when necessary. Even more important
would be the need to exercise greater care/discretion at the time of according
permission to serving the case may be, for publication of material which would attract the
provisions of the Official Secrets Act, 1923.

(DP&qT letter No. 11017/48/92—AIS(III) dated 4.2.1993)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 10 AND RULE 13

1. No objection if individual members of the trainee took part in the variety of
performance organised by the public organising committee, but collection of
contribution is not allowed: - |n connection with the Tagore Centenary Celebrations,
sanction of the Government of India was sought by members undergoing training at the
Central Police Training College to collect funds in aid of the Viswa Pharaoh University
and to stage a variety performance. While the sanction to collect contributions was not
given it was indicated that there would be no objection if individual members of the
trainees took part in the variety performance, organised by the public organising
committee.

(G.I. M.H.A. letter No. 8/22/61—AIS(III), dated 4"" May, 1961).

2. A moS should not be allowed to collect any contributions/donations in
connection with the celebrations of the Anniversaries of Independence etc.: - A
question has been raised as to whether District Magistrates/ Deputy

244
 Commissioners/District Collectors can be authorised to raise voluntary contributions in
connection with the celebrations of the 25th Anniversary of Independence. The Central
Government have considered the matter carefully and are of the view that association of
Government servants with such collections is bound to evoke public criticism. It has
therefore, been decided that members of the All India Services should not be allowed to
collect any contributions/donations in connection with the celebrations of the 25th
Anniversary of Independence.

[D.P. & A.R. Letter No. 5/13/72—AlS (III), dated 9-8-1972]

3. Members of the Services may not be allowed to be a member of the
societies/bodies which collect funds/accept contributions: - A member of an All
India Service, who is permitted under rule 13(3) of the All India Services (Conduct)
Rules, 1968 to associate himself with Societies which have a specific objective like
building schools/hospitals or celebrating centenaries etc. of eminent public
meni/institutions etc. cannot, under rule 10 ibid accept contribution to the society or
otherwise associate himself with the raising of any fund or other collections in cash or in
kind for that society without the previous sanction of the State Government if he is
serving in connection with the affairs of the State and with the previous sanction of the
concerned Ministry/Department if he is serving in connection with the affairs of the
Centre. If a member of the Service is working in connection with the affairs of the State
Government, it is for that Government to decide, while permitting him under rule 13(3),
whether any previous Sanction under rule 10 is to be given to him in his capacity as
Chairman/Office Bearer of the body to collect funds or to associate himself with
collection of funds by that body. If the State Government are of the view that such
previous sanction should not be given for any reason and, if the body concerned is likely
to raise funds for any specific purpose, then State Government will be well advised not
to permit the member of the service to associate himself with that Society under rule
13(3). If, however, State Government are of the view that previous sanction under rule
10 be given then there is no bar to the member of the Service to collect funds or
associate himself with the collection of funds by that society as the requirements of rule
10 will stand fulfilled as far as he is concerned.

2. However, it should be remembered that association of AIS officers who hold
responsible positions with fund collection for societies/bodies is bound to evoke public
criticism. It would, therefore, be appropriate that members of the Service in Districts are
not permitted under rule 13 to associate themselves with such bodies whose specific
objectives can be fulfilled only by collection of funds. In fact, Government of India
Decision No.2 below rule 10 of the Rules ibid stipulates that members of All India
Services should not be allowed to collect any contribution/donations in connection with
the celebrations of the 25th anniversary of Independence.

3. The State Governments are advised that, in view of the circumstances explained in
para 1above, it would be but proper not to permit members of the All India Services to be
associated with such societies/bodies lest the credibility of the officers in the eyes of the
public should be eroded.

[DPAR letter No. 11017/44/81—AlIS(III), dated the 29"" October, 1981]

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 14

1. It has been decided that taking of loans from reputable firms or banks does not
require previous sanction of the Government under this rule.

245
 [M.H.A. O.M. 8/79/62—AIS(III), dated 24th October, 1962].

2. ‘Small amount’ under sub-rule 4 depends on case to case basis: - A question
having arisen and it was decided that the definition of small amount used in proviso to
sub-rule (4) depends on the circumstances of each individual cases and no hard and
fast criteria can be laid down e.g., what constitute a small loan for an officer drawing Rs.
2,250 may not be shall amount for another officer drawing Rs. 500.

[M.H.A. No. 8/69/73—AlS (III), dated 30-12-1963].

3. If a moS, holding shares of a particular company, subsequently appointed to a
post which requires to deal with the affairs of that company, he may not be
permitted to such post or he may be asked to dispose of his shares of that
company: - Instances have come to notice of this Department where members of the All
India Services had purchased shares from Company, etc., with which they were not
having any official dealings but later on they were appointed/transferred to a post, which
required them to deal with the company etc., of which he had purchased the shares
earlier. The question whether they may be allowed to retain such shares has been
considered and it has been held that it would be necessary to abide by the provisions of
Rule 14(4)(ii) of the All India Service (Conduct) Rules, 1968 in letter and in spirit.
Accordingly, in such cases, either the work concerning the company in question may be
withdrawn from the concerned officer or he may be asked to dispose of his shares,
irrespective of the fact that the holdings of the officer or any member of his family in the
company concerned may be nominal.

2. It is requested that the above decision may be uniformly applied in all such cases.
[D.P. & A.R letter No. 11017/2/77—AIS(III), dated 22nd April, 1977].

4. Procedure for treatment of fixed deposits with companies and banks: -
Questions have been raised, from time to time in regard to the treatment to be accorded
to fixed deposits with companies and banks. Doubts have been raised particularly on the
point whether in regard to such deposits, the provisions of Rule 14(4) of the AIS
(Conduct) Rules, 1968,will be attracted. The matter has been examined and the position
is clarified as under :

(1) Fixed deposits with public limited companies, whether in the private sector or
the public sector, will be covered by the saving clause in Rule 14(4) of the AIS
(Conduct) Rules, 1968, as public limited companies receive deposits from the
public on authorisation given by the Central Government under the companies
(Acceptance of deposits from the public) Rules, 1975. However, where the
amount of deposit with a public limited company exceeds the monetary limits
laid down in Rule 16(4) of the AIS (conduct) Rules, 1968, then a report to the
prescribed authority in regard to the deposit will be necessary under that rule.

(2) Deposits with private limited companies and firms are in the nature of loans to
those companies and firms and they should be regulated with reference to the
provision or Rule 14(4) of the AIS (Conduct) Rules, 1968.

(3) Fixed deposits with banks are, as already provided in Rule 14(4) of the AIS
(Conduct) Rules, 1968, exempt from the operation of this rule. However, in
regard to fixed deposits with banks also, a report should be made to the
prescribed authority under Rule 16(4) of the AIS (Conduct) Rules, 1968, if the
monetary limits laid down therein are exceeded. The clarification contained in

246
 Prar 4 of the Department letter No. 5/8/73—AlISIII, dated 1-7-74 will stand
modified to this extent.

(4) Day-to-day Savings Bank transactions, either with a bank or with a post-office
would not, however, come with in the purview of Rule 16(4) of the AIS
(Conduct) Rules, 1968.

[DP & AR letter No. F. 11017/24/81—AIS(III), dated 22-6-82]

5. A moS should not purchase nor should he permit any member of his family to
purchase shares from out of the quota reserved for friends and associates of
Directors of Companies: - A question has raised whether a member of All India
Services can purchase share of companies from out of a quota reserved for the friends
and associates of the Directors of Companies. The provisions of rule 14(2) of the AIS
Conduct Rules 1968, makes it clear beyond doubt that a member of All India Services
should be circumspect in the matter of making investments and their is room for the
inference that purchase of shares in a company from out of the quota reserved for
friends and associates of Directors is likely to embarrass him in the discharge of his
official duties at some time or other. In the circumstances, and keeping in view of the
provisions of rule 14(2) of the AIS Conduct Rule, 1968 member of AIS should not
purchase nor should he permit any member of his family to purchase shares from out of
the quota reserved for friends and associates of Directors of Companies.

(DP&T No. 11017/52/92 AIS(IIl), dated 27/1/1993)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 16

1. Declaration of immovable property to be made in Form-| in duplicate, one to the
concerned State Government and the other to the Establishment Officer of the
Government of India: - The members of the Service serving in connection with the
affairs of the Union or serving under a Foreign Government or outside India shall submit
the declaration under sub-rule 1 & 2 in Form 1. The declaration shall be submitted in
duplicate, one copy being forwarded to the State Government, on whose cadre the
member is borne, and the other to Establishment Officer to the Government of India. As
far as the members of the Service serving in connection with the affairs of the State are
concerned, the State Governments may adopt the same form, subject to such changes,
if any, as they may consider necessary in the light of local conditions. In their case also,
the declaration shall be submitted in duplicate, one copy being forwarded to the
Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs.

2.The returns shall be submitted in separate sealed covers subscribed as follows:—

“Statement of immovable property furnished under rule 16 (1) of the All India
Services (Conduct) Rules, 1954, on the first appointment for the year.

Name (In block letters)
(Service, Cadre) and
Designation of Officer,”

3.The returns in respect of members serving in connection with the affairs of the Union
etc., will be kept in separate folders. When the return relating to a particular year is

247
 received from such a member it would be added to the relevant letter and retained in
safe custody, after it is scrutinised by the Deputy Secretary (Vigilance). The State
Governments may also adopt the same course in respect of returns of members serving
under them.

[G.1., M.H.A. letter and O.M. No. 8/2/54—AIS (Il), dated 8th November, 1955, and O.M.
No. 18/2/55—AIS (Ill), dated 23rd May, 1956 read with letter No. 12(2)—E.0O. III/69,
dated 13th November, 1959].

2. The return of immovable property shall be submitted by the moS within one
month on his first appointment to the Service and subsequently in the month of
January every year: - The return of immovable property shall be submitted by the
members of the Service on their first appointment to the Service within a month of such
appointment and subsequently in the month of January every year. The initial return
shall show the position as on the date of their appointment and subsequent returns as
on the 1st January of the year in which they are submitted.

[G.I., M.H.A. No. 8/9/60—AlIS (III), dated 16th February, 1960.]

3. The moS should report the share in a joint family property and require to obtain
prior permission of the Government for the disposal, if necessary: - Under this rule,
a member of the Service who has share in a joint family property is required to report it.
He is also required to obtain Government's permission for the disposal of his share in
the joint family property, when such permission is necessary under sub-rule (4).

[G.I., M.H.A. U.O. No. 6/34/57—AlS (II), dated 7th May, 1957.]

4. The moS should seek prior permission before starting construction/extension
of a house and should report details after construction: - The Govt. of India have
decided that the purchase of any movable property exceeding Rs.15,000 in value by a
member of the Service for the construction or extension of a house shall be reported to
the prescribed authority in the following manner:

(i) before starting the construction/extension, he shall report or seek
permission, as the case may be, in form IV, and

(ii) after completing the construction/extension, he shall report in Form V.

2. The details in Forms IV and V shall be furnished wherever it is possible to do so.
Where however it is not possible to furnish details, the members shall mention the
covered area, on which the building is proposed to be erected, and the estimated cost of
the building.

The decision should be construed to have been issued under Rule 16.

[G.I. M.H.A. letter No. 6/5/57—AIS (Ill), dated 12"" September, 1957, read with letter No.
11017/25/75—AlS (Il), dated 9° September, 1975 and letter No. 11017/40/75—AlIS (Ill),
dated 11'" November, 1975.]

5. If construction of a house is being done by a contractor, the moS should
indicate whether he has any official dealing with him or not: - |t should inter alia also
be mentioned in the prescribed form | whether the construction etc. would be done by
any contractor. If the construction is to be done by a contractor he should also indicate
whether he had or has any official dealings with the contractor.

[M.H.A. letter No. 8/55/63—AIS (Ill), dated 1S February, 1964.]

248
 6. Interest in joint family property, which is non-existent if governed by Dayabhai
School, need note be reported: - In the case of a member of the Service governed by
the Dayabhai School, he has no right in the ancestral property, so long as father is alive.
His interest in the joint family property, which is non-existent, is not therefore, to be
included in the return prescribed in sub-rule (3).

[letter no.6/37/57-AlS-II dated 18.11.1957]

7. Transaction of movable property by the wife or by a member of the family of a
moS from his/her won funds, need not be reported, however, transaction of
immovable property in this regard need to be reported separately: - A question was
raised whether a transaction involving purchase of movable property exceeding
Rs.2000/- in value by the wife or by an other member of the family of an All India service
Officer, entirely from his/her funds, is required to be reported to the Government and
whether such property should be included in the property return which the State
Government may call for under sub rule (5).

2. It has been decided that such transaction in movable property need not be reported to
the Government. As regards similar transactions in immovable property by the family
members of an All India Services officers, while they are not required to be reported as
and when they are entered into, they have to be included, as separate items in the
returns of immovable property prescribed in sub-rule (2) .

3. As regards return which the State Government may prescribed under sub-rule (5), it is
not, circumscribed by the provision of sub-rule(2). Thus, though there is no mention of
the members of their families in the return prescribed by them under sub-rule (5).

[G.I. M.H.A. letter No. 16/33/59—AIS—(III), dated 9" September, 1959]

8. Fixed deposits in banks from the savings of the salary of the moS need not be
reported, but all purchases of Postal or National Saving Certificate exceeding
Rs.2,000 in value need to be reported: - The Government of India have decided that,
while fixed deposits in a bank or deposit in a saving bank account made by a member of
the Service from out of his salary or accumulated savings would not come within the
scope of sub-rule (2), it would be necessary for the member to report to the Government
all purchases of Postal or National Saving Certificate exceeding Rs.2,000 in value, from
such accumulated savings or deposits in banks or post offices, as the Postal or National
Saving Certificates come in the same category as insurance policies, shares, securities
and debentures mentioned in Explanation | of rule 16(5).

[G.I., M.H.A. letter No. 16/59/59—AIS (Il), dated 12" January, 1960.]

9. Provisions of this rule apply to transactions, even though they are with persons
outside the jurisdiction of a member of the Service or outside the State, on whose
cadre he is borne: - Provisions of this rule apply to transactions, even though they are
with persons outside the jurisdiction of a member of the Service or outside the State, on
whose cadre he is borne. In such cases, the procedure to be followed before grant of
sanction approval to the purchase or sale of immovable property by the member is, that
the State Government may ascertain from the local authorities, in the case of property
situated within the State, whether the price to be paid or the sale price is reasonable in
the case of sale or purchase of immovable property situated outside the State the State
Government concerned may be addressed in the matter.

[G.I. MHA letter No. 8/4/60—AIS(III) dt. 30" January 1960.]
10. Sanction of the Government is necessary for contribution towards
construction of a building on a plot owned by a member of the family: - A doubt

249
 was raised whether sanction of the Government was necessary where a member of the
Service contributed towards the construction of a building on a plot of land owned by a
member of his family.

2. Such a transaction would come within the scope of sub-rule (4) if the contribution in
cash or kind exceeds Rs.2,000 in value. The requirement of this sub-rule should,
therefore, be complied with by the officer.

[M.H.A. letter No. 8/6/61—AIS (Ill), dated 16"" February, 1961.]

11. Where a member of the Service enters into a transaction in immovable
property with the Government no prior sanction is necessary.

[M.H.A. letter No. 8/36/61—AlS (Ill), dated 25" August, 1961.]

12. Construction/extension of a house financed entirely by a member of the family
of the moS need not be reported: - The intention behind the forms prescribed in
Government of India’s decision (4) above is that the immovable property that would be
acquired during the construction/extension should be reported to the Government as
required by sub-rule (4). If the construction/ extension is financed entirely by a member
of the family of the officer, rule 16 would not be attracted and hence it would not be
necessary for him to submit the reports; but where such construction/extension is
financed wholly or partly by a member of the Service in his own name or in the name of
any member of his family, reports will have to be submitted.

[M.H.A. letter No. 8/19/62—AlS (III), dated 15" March, 1962.]

13. The Government of India have decided that a ‘Co-operative Society’ can be
termed as a regular/reputed dealer for purposes of rules 16(3) and 16(4) of the All
India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968.

[M.H.A. letter No. 8/69/62—AlS (Ill), dated 4"" September, 1962.]

14. Sub-rules (3) and (4) extend to gifts made by a member of the Service to his wife
relative dependents etc. When a gift is made by a member of the Service to his relative
or dependents the question of approaching a dealer or an agent would not arise. The
proviso to sub-rules (3), (4) of rule 16 have therefore, no application where the nature of
transaction is such as to exclude the possibility of the engagement of a dealer or agent.
In view of this, a member of the Service need not obtain the prior permission of the
Government for making gifts to his wife or relatives or any one else. It would suffice if he
makes a report to the Government under rule 16(3) or 16(4) as the case may be for
information.

[Deptt. of Personnel and A.R. letter No. 9/15/71—AlIS (Ill), dated 26"" August, 1971.]

15. Properties acquired by the members of the family of the moS from out of their
own funds need not to be included in the property return of the moS: - Sub-rules
(3) and (4) of rule 16 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, apply only to
properties acquired etc. by the members of the Service either in their own names or in
the names of the members of their families. In other words, the properties either
acquired by the members of the families of the officers from out of their own funds or
inherited by them would not attract the provisions of the rules. As such, the movable/
immovable properties owned, etc. by the members of the families of the officers, which
are either inherited by them or acquired by them from out of their own funds, are not
required to be included in the property returns envisaged in sub-rule (2) of rule 16 ibid

(Letter No 5/4/74—AlS (Ill), dated 21° February, 1974.]

250
 16. No prior permission is needed for acquiring any movable/immovable property
by inheritance, but reported to the Government (if value exceeds Rs.2000/- in case
of movable property) ; - A question has arisen as to whether a member of All India
Services should report to, or seek permission of, Government under sub-rule (3) and (4)
of the rule 16 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 for acquiring immovable
and movable properties by inheritance. The following clarification is issued for the
guidance of the State Government:—

16.2 Sub-rule 3 of rule 18 provided that no member of the Service shall, except with the
previous knowledge fo the Government: -

(a) acquire any immovable property by lease, mortgage, purchase, gift or otherwise,
ether in his own name or in the name of the member of this family; or

(b) dispose by lease, mortgage, sale, gift or otherwise any immovable property owned
by him or held by him either in his own name or in the name of any member of his
family.

The proviso below this sub-rule envisages that previous sanction of the Government

shall be obtained by a member of the Service for entering into any such transaction if it

is with a person having official dealings with him or otherwise than through a regular
reported dealer.

3. The word ‘or otherwise’ occurring in the sub-rule could cover property acquired by a
member of the Service by inheritance also. When a member of the Service inherits any
immovable property, the question of approaching a dealer or agent would not arise and
the proviso below this sub-rule will have no application in such types of transaction. A
member of the Service need not, therefore, obtain prior permission of the Government
for acquiring any immovable property by inheritance. He should, however, submit a
report to the Government giving full details of the property so acquired.

3.1 Acquiring movable properties (including cash) by member of the Service by
inheritance, would amount to transaction in movable property, for the purpose of sub-
rule (4) of rule 16 ibid. In this type of transaction also, since the proviso below this sub-
rule would have no application as member of the Service need not obtain prior sanction
of the Government for acquiring any movable property (including cash) by inheritance.
He should, however, report to the Government the details of the movable property
(including cash) inherited by him if the value of such property exceeds rupees two
thousand.

[D.P. & ALR. letter No. 5/19/74—AlS (Ill), dated 3° July, 1974.]

17. A moS need not report to seek permission from the Government for depositing
money in and receiving final payment from the Cumulative Time Deposit Account
whether operated with a bank or a post office even if the amount in question
exceeds Rs.2,000 and also deposits/withdrawals of amounts exceeding
Rs.15,000/- from his back account: - A question has been raised whether investment
in Unit Trust of India, Treasury Savings Deposits, National Savings Certificates, Post
Office Time Deposits etc. is a transaction in movable property for the purpose of sub-rule
(4) of rule 16. It is clarified that sale or purchase of Units of Unit Trust of India, Treasury
Savings Deposits, National Saving Certificates is a transaction in movable property if the
value of any such transaction exceeds Rs.15,000 member of the service has to report to
the Government about such transaction as provided for in sub-rule (4). Prior permission
of the Government is not necessary for entering into such type of transactions. It has
also been decided that a member of the Service need not report to seek permission from
the Government for depositing money in and receiving final payment from the

251
 Cumulative Time Deposit Account whether operated with a bank or a post office even if
the amount in question exceeds Rs.2,000.

2. Similarly, a member of the Service is not required to report to the Government about
the deposits and withdrawals of amounts exceeding Rs.15,000 to and from his account
in a bank.

[Deptt. of Personnel and A.R letter No. 5/32/74—AIS(III), dated 22nd November, 1974
and No. 11017/12/75—AIS(III), dated 14th July, 1975.]

18. Procedure for prior permission for joining chit fund, taking life insurance
policies, making fixed deposits in banks: - A question has arisen whether:—

(a) a member of an All India Service should obtain permission of the Government
for joining chit fund;

(b) a member of an All India Service should report to the Government or seek prior
permission of the Government for taking life insurance policies; and

(c) a member of the Service should obtain permission of the Government for
making fixed deposits in banks.

The correct position is explained in the following paragraphs:

2. The subscriptions which a member of an All India Service gives to a chit fund would
be a transaction in movable property within the meaning of sub-rule (4) of rule 16 of the
All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968. If the annual subscription to the chit fund
exceeds Rs. 2,000 a member of the Service has to report to the Government under the
aforesaid rule previous sanction of the Government would be necessary only if the
member of the service concerned has official dealings with the chit fund and if it is not a
registered chit fund company. The amount that a member of the service may receive
from the chit fund can be classified into two categories.

(i) receiving the amount of the sum total of the contribution payable by all
subscribers for any one instalment less the discount or commission payable to
the Chit Fund company by bid before the expiry of the period upto which the
subscription is to be made, and

(ii) receiving the amount at the time of maturity.

2.1 As regard (i) above, since the amount received, by a subscriber from the chit fund by
bid would be more than the amount subscribed by him and the difference will have to be
made good by him by future subscriptions upto the total period of the chit fund, the
amount received in such case would amount to loan received from the chit fund
company. Since the chit fund company is not a banking company and the provisions of
the Banking Regulations Act 1949 are not therefore, applicable to such companies, a
member of the Service has to obtain permission of the Government under proviso to
sub-rule (4) of rule 16 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 for receiving the
money from the chit fund companies in such cases. As regards (ii) if the amount
received from the chit fund exceeds Rs.2,000 a member of the Service has to report to
the Government under sub-rule (4) of the rule 16 ibid because the amount received by
him would not be exclusively the amount subscribed by him but would also include the
commission payable by the chit fund company.

3. As regards (b), a member of the Service need not obtain prior permission of the
Government for taking a life insurance policy. He will have, however, to submit a report
to the Government as laid down below:

252
 (i) A member of the Service should submit a report to the Government while
taking an insurance policy if the annual premium of it exceeds Rs.15,000/-.
However, if the annual premium first determined is less then Rs.15,000/- but on
conversion, it exceeds Rs.15,000/- a report to the Government is necessary at
the stage. When he receives the sum assured as survival benefit/on maturity of
the policy he need not submit any report to the Government.

(ii) A member of the Service need not report to the Government while taking an
insurance policy annual premium of which is less than Rs.2,000/-. He should
however, submit a report to the Government as the time of receiving the sum
assured as survival benefit/on maturity of the policy.

4. As regards (c) while fixed deposits in a bank or deposits in a Savings Bank account
made by a member of the service from out of his salary or accumulated savings would
not come with in the scope of sub-rule (2), it would be necessary for the member of the
service to report to the Government all purchase of Postal or National Savings
Certificates exceeding 15Rs. 2,000 in value, from such accumulated Savings.

(M.H.A., letter No. 16/59/59—AISI(III), dt. 13-1-1960 read with DP. & AR. letter No.
5/8/73—AIS(IIl), dated 1-7-1974).

19. No prior sanction of Government is necessary in transaction of immovable
property with the State Housing Boards for purchasing flats etc., but the
Government should be informed in advance: - |n cases of transactions in immovable
property with the State Housing Boards in regard to purchase of residential flats etc. no
prior sanction of the Government is necessary. However, the officers have to inform the
Government in advance. Attention is also invited to Government of India decision 14
below rule 16 of the A.I.S. (Conduct) Rules, 1968 (reproduced at p. 104 of AIS Manual
Part | corrected upto 1-8-1984).

(G.R. DP & AR O.M. No. D2456/83— AIS(III), dt. 3-12-1983.)

20. Rental value of property exceeding Rs.10,000/- for a year to be shown in the
annual property returns and rental value exceeding Rs.15,000/- need to be
reported to the Government: - A question has been raised whether the house/flat let
out a member of All India Services, the rental value of which does not exceed 10,000/-
p.m., is required to be reported to the Govt. It has been decided that the property return
is filled on annual basis, therefore, if the rental value of property exceed Rs.10,000/- for
a year, it is be shown in the annual property returns. The rental value of the property
exceeding Rs.15,000 it to be reported to the Govt.

(DP&T No. 11017/37/92 AIS(III), dated 2/9/92),)

21. Powers of the Central Government in respect of IPS officers working in the
Central Police Organisation in ranks upto D.I.G. shall be exercised by the heads of
the organisations concerned under delegated powers: - In exercise powers vested
under rule 22 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, it has been ordered that
the powers of the Central Govt. under sub-rule (4) of rule 16 of the All India Services
(Conduct) Rules, 1968 in respect of I.P.S. officers working in the Central Police
Organisation in ranks upto D.I.G. shall be exercised by the heads of the organisations
concerned. Copies of sanctions issued in this regard will, however, be endorsed to the
Ministry of Home Affairs (1.P.S. Section).

[Order No. 11017/22/78—AIS(III), dated 5-7-79.]

22. transaction entered into by the officer on behalf of a Trust need to be reported
to the Government if the moS or his wife is a Trustee: - A question has been raised

253
 whether transactions made by a Trust are to be reported to the Govt. if the Trustee is a
member of the All India Services or his wife is a Trustee—

2. It has been decided that any transaction entered into by the officer on behalf of the
Trust will be dealt with under the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 as if the
transaction(s) were entered into in his personal capacity. In other words, the provisions
of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 attract also the transactions entered into
by the member of the Service on behalf of the Trust.

[Deptt. of Personnel & Trg. letter No. 11017/95/84—AIS(III), dated March, 1985]

23. The moS, while reporting to the Govt. or seeking the permission of a
transaction, has to indicate whether he has had any official dealings with the
person with whom he has entered into of proposes to enter into the transactions
in movable of immovable property: - As per the existing provisions of Rules 16(3) of
the AIS (Conduct) Rules 1968, a member of the service is not allowed either in his own
name or in the name of any member if his family to acquire or dispose of any immovable
property without the previous knowledge of the Government. It is also provided that
pervious sanction of the Govt. shall be obtained if any such transaction is with a person
having official dealings with the person.

2. Attention is invited to this department's letter No. 5/18/73—AIS(III) dated the 20" July
1973 wherein it has been clarified that a member of the service has to obtain the
pervious sanction of Govt. in the following types of transactions:

(i) transactions with persons having official dealings with the member of the
services;

(ii) transactions with persons having no official dealings with the member of the
service.

3. When a member of the service reports to the Govt. or seeks the permission of a
transaction, he has to indicate whether he has had any official dealings with the person
with whom he has entered into of proposes to enter into the transactions in movable of
immovable property. It is therefore for the Government to decide whether the transaction
is in accordance with the provisions of the transactions thereon especially in regard to
Rule 3(1) ibid, and to grant or refuse permission accordingly.

[letter No. 11017/95/84—AISI(III), dt. 4.5.1993]

24. State Governments should ensure that every moS should furnish their annual
property returns in respect of every calendar year, by the 31° January of the next
year. - In accordance with the provisions of Rules 16(2) of the AIS (Conduct) Rules,
1968, every member of the service is required to submit an annual return giving full
particulars regarding the immovable property inherited by him or owned or acquired by
him or held by him on lease or mortgage, either in his own name of in person. It has
been prescribed in Government of India’s instruction Nos. 1 & 2 below Rule 16 ibid that
the return of immovable property in form | shall be submitted by the members of the
service on their first appointment to the service within a month of his appointment and
subsequently in the month of January every year. The need for obtaining these returns
regularly and making careful scrutiny of the same has also been reiterated from time to
time.

2. It has however, been noticed that in many cases these returns are not being
submitted on time. All State Governments etc. are therefore requested to ensure that the
returns of immovable property are submitted by all members of the service under their
control, in respect of every calendar year, by the 31%' January of the next year. It may
also be impressed upon them that failure on the part of the members of the Service to

254
 comply with the requirements of the aforesaid rules constitutes good and sufficient
reason for institution of disciplinary proceedings against them.

[letter No. 11017/74/93—AIS(III) dated 4.1.94]

25. All moS should scrupulously follow the provisions of this rule while
submitting the property returns lapses of would attract action under AlS(D&A)
Rules, 1969: - | am directed to refer to the provisions contained in sub-rule(1) and (2) of
Rule 16 of the All India Services(Conduct) Rules, 1968 Rules in regard to submission of
immovable/movable and valuable property returns to be filed by the members of the All
India Services and to state a review of the application of the said provisions has
revealed certain short-falls, namely:

a. While filling the annual immovable property returns, in some cases, officers had
not initially furnished information of acquisition of property in the years when
they were due but the return subsequently filed contained information of
acquisition/disposal that had not been initially given.

b. There have been cases where the returns have not been filled by officers in
respect of the years when no property was acquired/disposed.

c. There have been cases where property returns have not been filed even
though the transactions have been taken place.

d. Cases where property transactions have been duly reported to the
administrative authorities and the relevant information recorded or the
necessary permission obtained and the sources of funding such property fully
explained but the annual property returns were not filled.

e. Case where the intimation or permission required were not given to or asked
for from the administrative authorities concerned and where the intimation has
been given but full details of the sources of acquisition or the income from
disposal have not been fully explained and the annual immovable property
statements were not submitted.

2. After careful consideration of all the aspects involved in dealing with the above kinds
of cases on receipt of complaints of allegations, the Government of India are of the
considered view that the State Governments/Union Territories Administration should
scrupulously follow the provisions contained in the All India Services(Conduct) Rules
and orders issued thereunder in order to avoid instances of such cases, by bringing
relevant portions thereof to the notice of the members of the All India Services.

3. Disciplinary action should invariably by taken against the officers concerned under the
A.|.S.(D&A) Rules, 1969 in case of lapse. However, in the case of minor lapses such as
those indicated in para (ii) and (iv), where the authorities are of the view that the lapses
are minor and of technical in nature, a lenient view can be taken depending upon the
circumstances of the case.

[letter No. 11017/33/92—AIS(III) dated 7.7.92]

26. Prior sanction/report is required by a moS whenever entering into transaction
under sub-rule 3 and 4 in prescribed forms: - | am directed to say that the procedure
for obtaining prior sanction or making a report about the transactions of property by a
member of the Service under Rule 16(3) and 16(4) of AlS(Conduct) Rules in a
prescribed forms has already been circulated to all State Governments vide this
department's letter no.11017/46/86-AIS(III) dated 20.1.1987 (copy enclosed)

255
 2. It has come to the notice of the Government that some state Governments have not
followed the procedure prescribed in the above said circular. It is however, reiterated
that whenever a member of Service enter into transaction under sub rule 3 and 4 or Rule
16 of the AlS(Conduct) Rules, 1968, he/she may obtain prior sanction or make a report,
as the case may be, in prescribed forms, copies of which are attached.

[Letter no.11017/14/95-AIS(IIl) dated 16.05.1995]

Copy of letter No.11017/46/86-AlS(IIl) dated 20.1.1987 regarding calling of a
statement of movable or immovable property at any time

1. | am directed to say that a question has been raised whether in addition to the
return of assets and liabilities to be submitted at the time of initial appointment and the
annual return of immovable property, the members of the Service can be asked to
furnish, at any time, the details of movable or immovable property held by them or on
their behalf. Attention in this regard is invited to sub-rule (5) of Rule 16 of the
AlS(Conduct) Rules, 1968, which provides that the Government or any authority
empower4d by it in this behalf, may at any time, by general or special order, require a
member of the Service to furnish a full and compete statement of such movable or
immovable property held or acquired by him on his behalf or by any member of his
family. The member of the Service can also be asked to indicate the means by which, or
the source from which such property was acquired. The State Governments are
requested to bring the above provisions to the notice of all administrative authorities with
the advice that thy may make use of these provisions, as and when considered
necessary.

2. The question of streamlining the procedure for obtaining prior sanction or making
a report about the transactions of property by the members of the Service under sub-
rules (3) and (4) of Rule 16, has also been considered and it has been decided that all
requests for obtaining prior sanction and making intimation about transaction in
immovable and movable property may be made in the enclosed standard Forms | and Il
respectively. These forms contain the basic information required by the prescribed
authority in all cases for considering a request for grant of permission or taking note of
an intimation given by the Government servant. The prescribed authority concerned, if it
so desires, may seek any additional information/clarification about the transaction
entered into by the members of the Service, depending upon the fact and circumstances
of the case.

3. The application for obtaining sanction or making prior intimation regarding
construction of house or additions to the house will continue to be made in the form
already prescribed.

4. The State Governments are requested to circulate these forms among all the
authorities under their control, who are required to deal with the requests for grant of
permission and receive intimation about transactions of property.

[Forms are given as Form-ll and Form-lll under heading of Forms]

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 19

1. A moS who marries to a person other than Indian Nationality should intimate
the facts to the Government and this aspect will be kept in view while deciding his

256
 posting: - | am directed to say that a member of the All India Service who has married
or marries a person other than of Indian Nationality shall forthwith intimate the fact to the
Govt. under Rule 19(3) of the AlS(Conduct) Rules, 1968.

2. The Central Govt. had issued certain instructions on the subject vide O.M. No.
25/34(S)/67—Estt.(A) dated the 16" March, 1970. A copy thereof is sent herewith for the
information of the State Govts. in dealing with such cases.

[DOP&T letter No. 11017/31/90—AIS(III) dated 16.10.90]

Copy of MHA, DOP&T OM No. 24/34/(S)/67—Estt(A) dt. 16.3.70 regarding
Government servants marrying foreigners—Action to be taken

The undersigned is directed to say that the question of Government servants
marrying foreigners has been considered. So far as officers of the Indian Foreign
Service are concerned, they are governed by the Indian Foreign Service (Conduct&
Discipline) Rules, 1961, and orders on the subject issued by the Ministry of External
Affairs. So as far as the Government servants working in or under other
Ministries/Departments are concerned, it is considered that some security risk is likely to
be involved when a Government servant has, as his wife a foreigner, especially if the
foreigner belongs to a country with which India’s relations are not quite happy and
accordingly, this aspect has to be kept in mind while ordering the posting or transfer of
the officer concerned. It has been decided that a provision should be made in the
Conduct Rules to the effect that a Government servants who has married/marries a
foreign national should inform the Government of such marriage and that the fact of such
marriage should be kept on record in the character roll or personal file of the officer, so
that this aspect is kept in view while deciding the posting of the officer. Amendment of
the Conduct Rules will be issued separately. An officer having a foreigner as wife should
not be appointed to a post, which is considered “sensitive”. The above decision would
also apply mutatis mutandis to the husbands of female Government servants.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 20

1. Every moS should scrupulously follow the rules relating consumption of
intoxicating drinks and violation of this rule is a good and sufficient reason for
taking disciplinary action against him and imposing any of the penalties specified
in rule 6 of the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1969: - Rule 20 of
the All India Services (Conduct) Rule, 1968 provides that:—

(i) the members of the All India Services shall strictly abide by any law relating to
intoxicating drinks or drugs in force in any area in which he may happen to be
for the time being;

(ii) he shall not be under the influence of any drink or drug during the course of his
duty and shall also take due care that the performance of his duties at any time
is not affected in any way by the influence of such drinks or drugs;

(iii) he shall not consume any intoxicating drink or drug in a public place;
(iv) he shall not appear in a public place in a state of intoxication; and
(v) he shall not use any intoxicating drink or drug to excess.

257
 The rule further defines public place as any place or premises (including a
conveyance) to which the public have, or are permitted to have, access whether on
payment or otherwise.

2. The above provisions of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, are of special
importance in the context of the latest endeavour to reduce the consumption of alcoholic
beverages and drug. While it is expected that every member of an a All India Services
will scrupulously adhere to the provisions of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules,
1968, mentioned above, it is also expected of the disciplinary authorities to keep a strict
watch on the conduct of members of the All India Services in regard to matter covered
by the aforesaid Rule. Violation of any of the provisions of rule 20 of the All India
Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, will constitute a good and sufficient reason for taking
disciplinary action against a member of the All India Service. While any of the penalties
specified in rule 6 of the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1969 can be
imposed on a member of an All India Service for good and sufficient reason after
following the prescribed procedure the disciplinary authorities should take a very serious
view of any violation of rule 20 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 and
should not hesitate to impose the severest punishment on such members of the All India
Service who are proved guilty of violating the said Rule.

[ DP & AR letter No. 11017/1/76—AlIS(III), dated the 5th February, 1976]

2. Definition of public places and special provisions for foreign Missions/visitors/
tourists etc: - Following points have been raised with reference to rule 20.

(i) Whether the definition of Public place would include a club meant exclusively
for members where it is permissible for the members to invite non-members as
guests, and

(ii) whether a hotel would be a public place or not for the purpose of the said rule.
2. The position in regard to the above two points is clarified as under:

(i) The club of the nature mentioned above would be a public place not only for
the non-member guests but also for members who may be the members of the
All India Services.

(ii) Drinking in the logging room in a hotel will not attract the provisions of rule 22
but drinking at the bar or restaurant where the public is permitted would attract
the aforesaid rule.

3. In their letter No. 20—10/75—SD, dated 21-2-1976 to all Chief Secretaries copy of
which was also forwarded to all Ministries and Departments the Department of Social
Welfare had advised the State Governments to make certain special provisions in the
interests of Foreign Missions, foreign visitors, Tourists and others, in the context of the
programme for reducing consumption of alcoholic beverages. The special provisions are
as follow :—

(a) here need be no restriction on serving of liquor in the precincts of foreign
embassies, foreign embassies may also be allowed to serve liquor in
halls/lounges of hotels and clubs provided which halls/lounges are exclusively
reserved or taken on by them to entertain a select number of invitees.

(b) The exemption referred to in (a) above may also be extended to parties hosted
by others in honour of foreigners, subject to the condition that the number of
invites does not exceed 100, and these hosting such parties obtain permits
from the Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate concerned.

258
 (c) & (d) Clubs may be permitted to provide for service of drinks in their bar rooms
only; beer, however, may be permitted to be served anywhere within the
precincts of such clubs.

(e) Alcoholic beverages may be permitted to be served in official parties hosted by
the Government of India/State Governments on “closed lounges” in hotels,
clubs etc., where important foreign visitors are required to be entertained.

4. A question has been raised whether consumption of intoxicating drinks by the
members of All India Services in the place and under the circumstances mentioned in
the preceding paragraph would amount to violation of Rule 20 of the All India Services
(Conduct) Rules, 1968. The position is clarified below, Seriatim:—

(a) In terms of the clarifications given in para 2 above a member of the All India
Services cannot take drinks in the clubs or in the Halls/Lounges. However,
where officers are required to attend official entertainments arranged by foreign
Missions in Halls/Lounges of Hotel and Clubs, in the discharge of their official
duties, taking drinks at such official entertainments will not attract rule 20 of the
All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, provided the places where the
entertainments arranged are exclusively reserved or taken on hire by the
Foreign Mission to entertain a select number of invitees.

(b) The clarification at (a) above would apply to the circumstance also, subject to
the condition that the parties are hosted by Government or any organisation
controlled by Government, like autonomous bodies, public sector undertakings,
etc.

(c) & (d) Members of the All India Services will not be exempt from the operation of
rule 20 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 in the places and
circumstances, referred to.

(e) The provisions of Rule 20 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968
would not apply to the members of the All India Services invited to such parties
in their official capacity.

[DP & AR letter No. 11017/66/76—AIS(III), dated 18" January, 1977]

3. Members of the All India service should refrain from consuming intoxicating
drinks even at official parties arranged by Foreign Mission whether in the Mission
premises or in halls-lounges exclusively reserved: - In the context of the present
policy of the Government aimed at progressive introduction of prohibition in the country
the position regarding consumption of intoxicating drinks by Government servants has
been reviewed. In partial modification of paragraph 4(a), (b) and (c) of this Department’s
letter dated the 18" January, 1977, referred to in the above paragraph it has been
decided that members of the All India service should refrain from consuming intoxicating
drinks even at official parties arranged by Foreign Mission whether in the Mission
premises or in halls-lounges exclusively reserved. The same position would obtain in
respect of consumption of intoxicating drinks at parties arranged by Government or
semi-Government Organisations where foreigners are entertained or at similar parties
hosted by others.

[DP & AR letter No. 11017/62/77—AlS(III), dated 9-1-1978]

4. Members of the All India Services should strictly comply with the provisions
contained in rule 20 relating to the consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs:
- The Home Minister in his D.O. letter No. 11013/3/84—Estt.(A), dated 30" March, 1984

259
 to the Chief Ministers of the States has emphasised the need for the Government
servants, serving both under the Central Government and under the State Governments,
to observe scrupulously and abide by any law relating to intoxicating drinks or drugs.

2. The members of the All India Services should strictly comply with the provisions
contained in rule 20 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 relating to the
consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs. Besides, there are also detailed executive
instructions about the role of disciplinary authorities in enforcing compliance by the
members of the All India Services, with the rules and orders on the subject.

[D.O. letter No. 11017/23/84—AlIS(III), dated the 31*' May,1984 from Secretary,
MHA, Deptt. of Personnel & AR to the Chief Secretaries of All India Services].

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S DECISIONS UNDER RULE 22

1. Delegation of certain powers of the Central Government under these Rules to
the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India: - Power of the Central
Government under rules 4, 6, 8, 11, 12, 14,15, 16(3), 16(4) and 16(5) of the All India
Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 have been delegated to each Ministry/Department in
respect of members of the Service working in or under them.

2. It has been decided in partial modification of the instructions contained in the said
O.M. No. 9/4/69—AlS(III), dated 23.1.1969 that reports submitted for information under
Rule 16(4) of the All India Services(Conduct) Rules, 1968 may be submitted, in the
cases of officers of the level of Joint-Secretary to the Additional Secretary/Secretary and
in the cases of officers of the level of Additional Secretary to the Secretary in the
Administrative Ministry concerned; in the cases of officers of the level of Secretary, may
be submitted to the Minister, in-Charge of the Ministry/Department.

[DP & Trg. O.M. No. 11017/18/85—AIS(III), dated 17-6-85,]

2. Delegation of powers of the Central Government under rule 5(2) and rule 15(2)
to the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India: - |n continuation of the
Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No.9/4/69—AIS(IIl), dated the 23 January, 1969, it has
been decided to delegate to Ministries/Departments, the powers of the Central
Government under sub-rule (2) of Rule 5 and sub-rule (2) of Rule 15 of the All India
Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, in regard to All India Services Officers working in or
under them.

2. If on submission of a report under sub-rule (2) of Rule 5 or sub-rule (2) of Rule 15 of
the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, it is proposed to take any action in relation
to such reports, the matter maybe referred to this Department in the case of Indian
Administrative Service officers, to the Ministry of Environment & Forests in the case of
Indian Forest Service officers and the Ministry of Home Affairs in the case of Indian
Police Service officers.

[DP & AR letter No. 11017/63/77—AIS(III), dated 22-3-78.]

Copy of the letter No. 11017/47/2005-AlS-IIIl dated 27/12/2005 addressed to the Chief
Secretaries of all States/Union Territories

260
 Subject: - AlS(Conduct) Rules, 1968 — Rule 13(1)(b) of AlS(Conduct) Rules, 1968 -
obtaining of prior approval of he Government before negotiating for or taking up of any
employment by the members of the All India Services.

As per the provisions of Rule 13(1)(b) of AlS(Conduct) Rules, 1968, members of
the All India Services are required to obtain prior permission of the Government before
they negotiate for, or undertake any other employment.

2. It has come to the notice of the Government of India that some members of
Service have negotiated private employment without the specific permission of the
Government. Instances have also come to light where a member of Service has joined a
private sector company without waiting further for the final acceptance of his resignation.
It has been viewed seriously and has been decided that violation of the provisions of the
aforesaid Rule is a grave misconduct entailing initiation of disciplinary proceedings for
major penalty under Rule 6 of AIS (D&A) Rule, 1969. All the members of All India
Services are therefore, advised to obtain prior permission of the Government before
negotiating for or undertaking any other employment.

3: It is requested that these instructions may be brought to the notice of all the
members of the All India Services.

Copy of the letter No. 11017/07/2008-AlS-III dated 01/07/2008 addressed to the Chief
Secretaries of all States/Union Territories

Subject: - Acceptance of part-time employment by the members of the All India Services.

It has come to the notice of this Department that there is some doubt about
allowing members of the All India Services to accept part-time employment in other
Government, quasi-Government or an autonomous body not controlled by the
Government or a private body. Such employment, even though it is outside office hours,
is contrary to the principle embodied in rule 13(1) of the All India Services (Conduct)
Rules, 1968, which stipulates that no member of the Service shall except, with the
previous sanction of the Government, engage directly or indirectly in any or business,
or negotiate for or undertake, any other employment.

2. Allowing a member of the Service to take part-time employment before/after
office hours in other organisations may result in some deterioration in his efficiency
because if he does part-time work in addition to his full working hours in his office, he
may not get sufficient time for rest and recreation and Will, therefore, be unable to give
undivided attention to his work even during office hours. Moreover, such part-time work
by members of All India Services leads generally to depriving unemployed people of
work, which they would otherwise have got.

Si Having regard to all these considerations, it has been decided that while the
competent authority may permit a member of the Service to undertake work of a casual
or occasional character, a whole time member of the Service should not ordinarily be
allowed to accept any part-time employment whether under Government or elsewhere,
even though such employment may be after office hours.

4. These instructions may please be brought to the notice of all the members of the
All India Services.

261
 Copy of the D.O. letter No. No.11017/04/2010-AIS-III dated 03/03/2010 from Cabinet
Secretary addressed to the all Secretaries of the Government of Indian and Chief
Secretaries of all States/Union Territories

Observance of ethics by Civil servants-Letter of Cabinet Secretary to Secretaries of all
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India.

Of late there have been some disturbing incidents which call for serious introspection by
civil servants. It is important that we ponder over the manner in which we discharge our
duties and fulfil our responsibilities and what we need to do to refurbish our image.

2. Civil servants are appointed on the basis of a fair and open competition. We
must respond in full measure to the faith that citizens have reposed in us and meet their
hopes and aspirations of good governance. Integrity, honesty, objectivity, impartiality,
transparency, accountability and devotion to duty are the core values which civil
servants should cherish and which should form an integral part of our decisions and
actions.

Bi: The issue of corruption needs to be addressed fairly and squarely. The
Government's policy of zero tolerance for corruption must be implemented fully and
effectively. Preventive vigilance should be strengthened. Transparency must be
introduced in decision making and in all our systems. Stringent action must be taken
against officers found guilty. Disciplinary proceedings must be expedited.

4. We need to stand by and uphold our core values. Senior officers must set an
example and mentor their colleagues. The Civil Services must work wholeheartedly to
provide good governance.

5. Please share these sentiments with all officers. Let us resolve to serve the nation and
the citizens in a committed manner.

262
 