No. I-11011/16/2022-CRD
Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department of Personnel and Training

3 Floor, Lok Nayak Bhawan,
New Delhi-110003.
Dated: 30" September, 2022.
Office Memorandum

Subject: Consolidated guidelines on cadre review of Central Civil Services.

The Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) is the nodal agency of the
Government of India for personnel management policies. As such, although cadre
management and cadre reviewing are primarily the concern of individual Cadre
Controlling Authorities (CCAs), the responsibility for laying down standards in the matter
and for coordination rests with the DoPT in accordance with its role as nodal agency for
formulation and evaluation of personnel policies in Government of India.

2. The concept of cadre review owes its origin to the recommendations made by the
First Administrative Reforms Commission in its Report on Personnel Administration
released in 1969. The Government of India had accepted recommendation of the ARC
and vide OM No. 5/1/71- PP (Vol VI) dated 6" May 1972, a Cadre Review Committee
(CRC) was constituted under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary with Secretary of
the Ministry controlling the Cadre, Secretary of DoPT and Secretary of Department of
Expenditure (DoE) in Ministry of Finance as members of the Committee. Vide the said
OM, the Department has also issued certain broad guidelines for objective cadre
management. As a part of this Department’s endeavour to keep the personnel policies
relevant to current and future needs, various instructions were issued on the cadre review.

3. Cadre review encompasses several key elements of cadre management such as
formation of service, manpower projection, recruitment planning, training, deputation,
encadrement, decadrement, creation of posts, managing reserves, etc. It helps realign a
service to the everchanging organizational needs and maintain congruence between
functional needs and legitimate aspirations of the officers. The main thrust of cadre review
is On manpower projections and recruitment planning on scientific lines aiming at the
same time at rationalization of the existing cadre structure of a Service in accordance with
certain predefined principles and a given set of objectives like improving the efficiency,
morale and effectiveness of the cadre. However, of late, the cadre management has not
been getting due attention or has been misconstrued as a process of upgrading
‘downgrading or creation of cadre posts only, which over a period of time has led to
serious distortions in the cadre/service. Hence, keeping in view the issues noticed by the
Department while conducting cadre review of various Central Group ‘A’ Services after

ge Page 1 of9
Kos ye
ay
 issuance of consolidated guidelines on 14.12.2010 and to keep the personnel policies
relevant to current and future needs, a revised consolidated Guidelines on cadre review
of Central Group ‘A’ Services is being issued through this OM in supersession of the OMs
on the subject, viz. OM No. 5/1/71- PP (Vol V1) dated 6" May 1972, F. No. 5(22)/73-PP
dated 12.03.1973, OM No. 5/45/77-PP dated 26 August 1977, OM No. 5/45/77-PP dated
26 August 1977, OM No. 5/22/81-PP-II dated 12.01.1982, OM No. 5/38/86-PP.I! dated
28.10.1986, OM No. 2/10/87-PP dated 21** May 1987, OM No. 2/1/87-PP dated
23.11.1987, OM No. 2/42/95-PP (CRD) dated 05.04.1995, OM NO. 1/8/96-CRD dated
2.3.2000, OM No. |. 11011/1/2009-CRD dated 14.12.2010, OM NO. I. 11019/17/2016-
CRD dated 15.02.2017 and OM No. I. 11019/10/2017-CRD dated 09.07.2018. Some of
the OMs are referred here below. Besides, the broad issues concerning cadre review
have been elaborated in the revised Monograph on cadre review of Central Group ‘A’
Services enclosed herewith (Annexure-l). The cadre review proposals under
consideration of this Department till issue of this OM or already considered by the CRC
will not require resubmission, however, the proposals prepared after issue of this OM may
be submitted as per its provisions.

4. Cadre Review of Central Group ‘A’ Services/cadres:
[OM No. I. 11011/1/2009-CRD dated 14.12.2010, Monograph 2010]

4.1. Formulation of Proposal:

(i) While considerable latitude will be available to the cadre authorities in preparing
and presenting cadre review proposals, it must be ensured that the necessary statistical
data are compiled and updated on a continuing basis in the format given in consolidated
guidelines. It is also necessary while presenting review proposals to give a sketch of the
historical background of the Service, its inception, its objectives, growth of service in last
cadre reviews, the implementation report of last cadre review, status of cadre review of
Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ cadres/posts in the Department, the functional and organisational
structure of the Cadre/Service, special features peculiar to the Service, difficulties and
problems faced during the process of cadre management , changes taken place in the
cadre structure from time to-time, the reports of any expert committee on the Service and
change in role of the Service/organisation. Present as well as the proposed organisational
structure of the Department and the Service showing posts at different levels with their
designations, pay scales and the functional inter-relationship among them along with
organisational chart should be enclosed with the cadre review proposal. The posts to be
upgraded should be identified and the justifications for upgradation should be mentioned.
Recruitment Rules/Service Rules, as amended till to date, both respect of Service posis
as well as its feeder posts, grade-wise seniority lists updated as on first of the “Current
Year’ (i.e. Year in which the proposals are being framed) should invariably be attached
with the proposal. In the format, the reference year may be taken as beginning from first
January of the year in which the proposals are being framed. The cadre review proposal
would be prepared by the CCA in the form of a Note for Committee of Secretaries. As

« wt Page 2 of 9
es
 such, apart from above information, every note should include details of inter-ministerial
consultations (if required), financial implications, approval required, annexures of the
information in prescribed format (Annexure Hl). A model cadre review proposal for ready
reference is at Annexure-lill.

[OM No. I. 11019/25/2014-CRD dated 12.09.2014]

(ii) The proposal would be formulated, to the extent possible, in consultation with the
representatives of service association(s). While drafting the proposal, all issues like
mandate of the service, expected changes in the Organization's activities, automation,
amendment in the business processes, recruitment planning, plugging the skill gaps,
cadre structure, career progression, incumbency, financial implications etc. must be
analyzed and made part of the proposal. These issues and their impact on cadre structure
have been discussed in the Monograph.

(iii) |The proposal may be considered on availability of manpower, functional and
strategic requirements. The CCAs should review the vacancies regulalry not only for their
filling up process but also for the continuance of such posts. It is better to surrender the
posts which are not feasible to be filled in long run on permanent basis.

(iv) The identification of each additional post required (either by way of fresh addition
to the cadre or through upgradation of an existing post) in terms of specific duties, would
be of considerable value in a cadre review proposal. As far as possible, work norms in
terms of duties and responsibilities should be unambiguously set out to justify the
proposed addition. It must be emphasized in this connection that some amount of
increase in work has to be treated as normal and should not lead to any increase in the
manpower requirements. Only perceptible and significant increases in activity should be
translated into additional personnel requirements. Proposals for increase in cadre
strength and introduction of new grades, thus, may generally be avoided and only be
moved if there are stringent functional justification. Having estimated the essential
additional needs, the levels or grades at which such needs arise should be clearly
identified. While making assessment for cadre review proposals, continuance of existing
posts and need of the service (zero base review) may also be assessed based on their
functional requirement, and if any of the posts/services becomes redundant due to
introduction of the advanced technology or changes in mandate of the Govt, such
posts/services may be abolished/merged.

(v) The efforts should be made to make the structure sustainable. While suggesting a
cadre structure, creation of high percentages of posts at higher level on the cost of lower
grades distorting the cadre and affecting the functioning of the organization adversely
may be avoided.

(vi) Full functional justification for creation/upgradation of each post should be given.
A job evaluation exercise may be undertaken for each category of posts to ensure that
different grades are assigned corresponding level of functions and responsibilities.

(vii) It may be ensured that the cadre review would not have an adverse impact on the
feeder grade.

af Page 3 of 9
 4.2 Reference to Department of Personnel and Training/Department of
Expenditure

(i) The proposal should be referred to DoPT with the approval of Integrated Finance
Division and the Minister in charge.

(ii) The CCA would also give a certificate that there is no Court Case pending having
a bearing on the cadre review.

(iil) | The name (s) of contact officer (s) for further/additional information may be clearly
indicated in the reference.

(iv) The proposal should be examined vis-a-vis the checklist provided in section 5 of
the Monograph to ensure that the proposal is complete in all respects.

4.3. Financial Implications

(i) The proposal having additional financial implications would be entertained strictly
on functional considerations like consistent increase in workload, horizontal expansion in
activities etc. keeping in view the economy instructions issued by the DoE from time-to-
time.

(ii) | While calculating the additional expenditure, the impact of Non-Functional
Upgradation/Non-Functional Selection Grade/Non-Functional Second Grade/Dynamic
Assured Career Progression/Flexible Complementing Scheme etc. (wherever applicable)
may be taken into account. The calculation sheet must be enclosed with the proposal.

4.4. Procedure for cadre review

(i) Every cadre should be reviewed once every five years. The review should be first
carried out by the CCA, preferably in consultation with the representatives of the
service/cadre in question. However, if it is convinced after such a review that no change
in the cadre structure is required, the decision should be conveyed to this Department
with the approval of Minister in charge.

(ii) All the Ministries/Departments may nominate a suitable officer for the purpose of
cadre review. It will be the responsibility of the nodal officers, so nominated, to provide
the necessary progress report in this regard to the Cadre Review Division of the DoPT.
(iii) | The cadre review proposal, so prepared by the CCA in the form of a Note for
Committee of Secretaries be referred to the Cadre Review Division of DoPT. The DoPT
would examine the proposal based on the various parameters of cadre review and obtain
the approval of Secretary (P) on its observations/recommendations and then refer it to
DoE for approval of Secretary (Expenditure).

(iv) | The Note would then be placed before the CRC by DoPT. The Cadre Review
Division of the DoPT acts as Secretariat to the CRC.

(v) Based on the recommendation of CRC, the proposal would be submitted for MOS
(PP)’s approval. It would then be referred to the DoE for Finance Minister's approval.

(vi) The CCA would then take approval of Cabinet. The Note for Cabinet should ideally
be prepared within a month of the approval of the MoS (PP) and Finance Minister on the
recommendation of CRC.

(vil) Within three months of the approval of the Cabinet, the CCA may initiate
amendment in the draft Recruitment Rules/Service Rules to give effect to the cadre

review. AQ.
AS cy Page 4 of 9
HW
 4.5. Composition of Cadre Review Committee-The Cadre Review Committee would
comprise the following functionaries:

(i) Cabinet Secretary Chairman

(ii) Secretary of the Ministry controlling the cadre Member

(iti) Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training Member

(iv) Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Department of Member .
Expenditure

(v) The senior most member of the service/cadre Member
concerned

Any additional functionaries related with the proposal may also be included, with
the approval of Cabinet Sectt., as invitee to participate in the meeting of CRC.

4.6. The list of Central Group ‘A’ Services/cadres, which are to be reviewed through
the above procedure as contained in para 4.1 to 4.5, are annexed as Annexure-lV.

4.7. It is reiterated that apart from the cadre review proposal of Central Group ‘A’
services/cadres listed herein, the above said procedure would be applicable in case of
other proposals like formation of new service/Group ‘A’ cadre, merger of Central Group
‘A’ Services, Grant of Organised Group ‘A’ Central Service status, declaration as dying
cadres etc. Cadre review does not automatically grant status of Central Group ‘A’
service/cadre or organised status, unless specific approval for it has been obtained during
the exercise. Such proposal may be moved alongwith cadre review proposal or
separately, as per requirement.

4.8. Creation of posts ouside cadre review: Normally, addition to a cadre by way of
increasing the number of posts at different levels should be considered only in the course
of five year cadre review. Mid review changes should be avoided as far as possible.
Regular cadre reviews carried out at five years intervals must envisage such eventualities
while making advance projections for the five year period of additional manpower
requirements. Accordingly, the need for creating posts, encadrement and upgradation of
posts not envisaged by the CRC before the next cadre review is due, can be expected to
be rare. In the event, however, of such eventuality, it may be ensured that the additional
posts so created conform to the cadre strcuture most recently approved by the CRC. The
adhoc measures of creation, encadrement, upgradation of posts is not supported if the
cadre review is due, however, in case of unavoidable circumstances, if such a proposal
is moved, this should be taken up with the Cadre Review Division of the DoPT first before
referring to the DoE alongwith the justification and reasons for not waiting for cadre review
for consideration of such proposal.

[OM NO. I. 11019/17/2016-CRD dated 15.02.2017]

4.9 Restriction on direct recruitment- The restriction on direct recruitment to the
extent that it should not exceed 3% of the total cadre strength imposed in 1998 (OM No.
1/8/98-CRD dated 5.11.1998) was lifted vide OM No. I. 11011/1/2009-CRD dated

fos : a Page 5 of 9
ANY
By
 14!" December, 2010 advising the CCAs not to resort to any bulk recruitment as it would
create a bulge in the structure leading to stagnation at later stage. The recruitment plan
for next five years may invariably be made part of the cadre review proposal and while
projecting such recruitment planning attempts may be made to keep it around ideal 3%
of the authorized cadre strength per year avoiding clubbing of recruitment. Recruitment
planning approved during the cadre review may be followed and for any deviation, fresh
plan may be finalized in consultation with the DoPT.

4.10. Maintenance of Statistical Profile: Statistical profile is one of the important tools
for not only preparing policy guidelines on cadre management and indication of career
progression of a service, but also to examine a cadre review proposal in scientific manner
with its impact on other similar services. The statistical profile is maintained half yearly,
i.e., 18 January and 1° July of every year. For the purpose the following may be ensured:

i. All the CCAs will have to provide Statistical Information within a given time frame
(18t half yearly report by 318 July and 2" half yearly report by 31% January). The
same may be placed on their respective websites too alongwith details about the
Service. The format for Statistical profile is at Annexure-V. Difference in cadre
strength from the last cadre review may be provided alongwith supporting
documents for addition/deletion which includes approval of the Competent
Authority and consultation of DoPT.

ii, The CCA would prepare civil list of the officers of the service preferably every year
and make available the same on the website of the Administrative Ministry under
intimation to this Department.

iii. | The CCA may provide status of implementation of last cadre review and conditions
imposed by the CRC/DoPT/DoE regularly by the end of every year, till the same is
fully implemented.

iv. The CCA may upload latest SRs/RRs on the website and provide a copy to the
Cadre Review Division of DoPT. ‘

v. The CCA may appoint nodal officer and provide name of nodal officer to the Cadre
Review Division of this Department.

vi. Notifications regarding Cadre Review/ Organized status etc. would also be
uploaded by the CCAs concerned on their respective websites.

vii. | The senior most member of the service (who is also a member of the CRC) may
also take up the matter with the concerned CCAs to provide the information within
the given time frame.

viii. | For the CCAs who fail to provide timely information, any request of encadrement,
upgradation, creation of posts etc. in the cadre would be considered only on the
basis of the cadre strength last approved by CRC.

[OM No. |. 11019/10/2017-CRD dated 09.07.2018]

BK Page 6 of 9
BO
 5. Cadre reviews of Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ employees/posts.
[OM No. 2/1/87-PP dated 23.11.1987]

5.1. Agency for conducting cadre reviews:
(i) The cadre reviews will be carried out by the CCA in consultation with the DoE.

(ii) | The Departmental CRC may be set up by the respective Ministries/Departments
controlling the cadres to be reviewed and should comprise the representatives of
the following:

(a) Attached/Subordinate Office concerned.

(b) Integrated Finance Division.

(c) The Personnel unit (Administration/Establishment Division) in the
Ministry/Department dealing with the personnel aspects of the cadre.

(d) Concerned Field Organizations.

(e) Any other member considered necessary by the CCA.

5.2. Principles governing cadre reviews:

(i) The cadre review may be visualized as an exercise for complete manpower
planning— considering the annual intake at the entry level, maintenance needs, growth
etc. rather than being viewed only as a need for upgradation of posts to provide
promotional opportunities to the members of the staff.

(ii) | The cadre review may be conducted on functional cum-structural consideration
with due regard to the duties and responsibilities and the need to promote efficiency in
the Organisation/Department. Hence, while conducting cadre review the cadre structure
may be made pyramidal with enough officers at all the levels for not only effective
functioning of the organization but also to fill higher posts. A structural ratio of 3:1 between
two consecutive grades (feeder grade: higher level) is better to fill posts.

(iii) | Wherever SIU norms/yardsticks have already been laid down for provision of staff,
these should be considered, while conducting cadre review for various categories/grades.
(iv) The cadre review exercise may be conducted periodically for the groups ‘B’ and
‘C’ posts without linking it to the level of stagnation in the cadre.

(v) | While conducting cadre review, time bound promotions may be considered only in
exceptional cases, where it is provided for in the Service Rules of respective
categories/grades of the concerned staff. The cadre review should be consistent with the
needs and requirements of the organization.

(vi) While conducting cadre review, the Administrative Ministry may consider
rationalization of categories/grades through merger, as over the passage of time, there
might have been proliferation of categories, levels and grades in each Service. A multi-
disciplinary approach may be considered rather than having strait jacket or water tight
compartmentalization.

i é .
wr
B Page 7 of 9
 (vii) The cadre review exercise may be conducted after every five years. However, if
CCA is convinced that no change in the cadre structure is required, the decision should
be taken in consultation with the Departmental CRC.

(viii) All the Ministries/Departments may nominate a suitable officer for cadre review of
Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts. It will be the responsibility of the nodal officers, so nominated, to
provide the necessary report in this regard to the Cadre Review Division of the DoPT
every year (by 31% January)

(ix) | The cadre review of Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts so conducted under the procedure
contained in above paras should not result in creation of posts in Central Group ‘A’
Services or any change in status of the cadres/services from Group ‘B’/ ‘C’ to ‘A’ for which
Guidelines are applicable as laid out in para 4.

5.3 Role of DoPT in cadre review of Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts: The primary
responsibility for conducting cadre review for Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ cadres will be of the
concerned CCAs in the respective Ministries/Departments. The DoPT will lay down the
policy, issue guidelines and if necessary, review the progress of cadre reviews, conducted
by the concerned CCAs/Ministries/Departments. Hence, any new policy issue contained
in the cadre review proposal may be referred to Cadre Review Division of this
Department.

5.4 Cadre review of Other services/cadres/posts: Apart from the Central Group ‘A’
Services/cadres listed in para 4.6 and Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts/employees (para 5), there
are Services classified as Central Group ‘A’ Service in the CCS (CCA) Rules 1965 (as
amended from time-to-time). All such services/cadres may also be reviewed through
DoPT and the guiding factors for preparation of cadre review proposal in these
services/cadres may be same as detailed in para 4. A composite cadre review proposal
for all the posts in that Service/cadre may be prepared.

6. Dealing with Isolated posts: In isolated categories where promotion to next
grade is not possible, efforts may be made to identify posts after considering the
qualifications and experience, duties and responsibilities attached to these posts, for
merging them with the existing cadres. While conducting cadre review of various
categories of services/cadres/posts, an exercise may be undertaken to identify such
isolated posts and to include them for encadrement, if feasible. In case it is not possible
to merge them in an existing or proposed hierarchical structure, these posts should not
be filled by direct recruitment but by transfer on deputation so that the incumbents of such
posts do not stagnate. While conducting cadre review exercise, creation of isolated posts
may be avoided, to the extent possible. Often departments create posts for various
reasons having similar functional duties and responsibilities as cadre posts. Such posts
are manned by both cadre officers and those outside the cadre(s). It should be the
constant endeavor of Cadre Authorities to periodically review the position regarding such
posts with a view to encadre them keeping in view:

(a) the nature of functions and responsibilities attached to them.

(b) __ the likelihood of their continuing.

(c) the desirability of deploying cadre officers to such posts.

vas "Page 8 of 9
Q or
 ti The above guidelines are being issued in accordance with the role of this
Department being nodal department for the manpower planning and policy and hence all
the Ministries/Departments may ensure necessary compliance to the above guidelines.
At the first stage, all the Ministries/Departments may nominate a nodal officer for the
purpose and constitute the Departmental CRC, wherever applicable, within one month of
issue of this OM and send a report to this Department (any change in nodal officer or
Departmental CRC may be endorsed to this Department). It may also be intimated
whether any of the cadres/services under their control (not listed with this OM) are
required to be reviewed through the CRC as per the provisions of this OM. Thereafter,
the preparation of cadre review proposals, wherever due, may be initiated and attempts
may be made to submit the proposal in this regard to this Department or Deptt. of
Expenditure (as the case may be) within six months. Calendar issued by this Department
for Central Group ‘A’ Services required to be reviewed through the CRC (para 4.5) from
time-to-time may be strictly complied.

[OM No. I. 11019/18/2022-CRD dated 14.02.2022]

oa,
~~ (Dr. Harmit Singh\Pahuja)

Dy. Secretary to the Government of India
To

_

. All the Ministries/Departments of Government of India

All Attached and Subordinate Offices of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions

All Union Territory Governments/Administration

Secretary, UPSC/Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India

Registrar, Supreme Court of India, New Delhi

Lok Sabha /Rajya Sabha Secretariat

All Sections of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.

N

St Oi Or B.

Copy to:

1. Cabinet Secretariat.

2. Secretary, Expenditure

3. Secretary, DoPT

4. Spl. Secretary (Pers), Deptt. of Expenditure, North Block

5, Additional Secretary (Cadre Review Division), Deptt. of Personnel & Training,
North Block

6. Joint Secretary (Estt.), Deptt. of Personnel & Training, North Block
7. US (CRD)/SO (CRD-I)/SO (CRD-I))
8. Guard File

om
_(Dr. Harmit Singh Pahuja)
Dy. Seerétary to the Government of India
Page 9 of 9
 Annexure-I to the O.M. No. I-11011/16/2022-CRD

Monograph of 2022
Section-1

Introduction

1, Cadre review encompasses several key elements of cadre management such as manpower
projection, recruitment planning, training, deputation etc. It helps realign a service to the ever-
changing organizational needs and maintain congruence between functional needs and legitimate
aspirations of the officers. The main thrust of cadre review is on manpower projections and
recruitment planning on scientific lines aiming at the same time at rationalisation of the existing cadre
structure of a Service in accordance with certain predefined principles and a given set of objectives
like improving the efficiency, morale and effectiveness of the cadre. However, of late, the cadre
management has not been getting due attention or has been misconstrued as a process of upgrading
/downgrading cadre posts, which over a period of time has led to serious distortions in the
cadre/service.

2. There has been a paradigm shift in the concept of governance with the Government reducing
its direct involvement in many areas and putting a renewed thrust on social sectors, skill development
and human resource development. Role based Governance with Citizen First approach using Digital
Technologies to deliver services at grass root level has a bearing on overall role of many organizations
and its cadres, sometimes requiring business process re-engineering. A Cadre Review should cover all
the aspect of congruence between efficient delivery of services and skill sets/aptitude improvement of
the members of Services while being consistent with Minimum Government Maximum Governance
requirement.

3. This Monograph attempts to bring out various issues involved in cadre review particularly in
the light of above changes for the guidance of cadre controlling authorities. The consolidated
guidelines on cadre review are contained in the Department of Personnel and Training’s O.M.

No. I-11011/16/2022-CRD dated 29.09.2022.

Plan of the Monograph

4. Section 2 attempts to explain various concepts relevant to cadre management such as the
concept of service, cadre, cadre structure, and so on. The issues related to general deficiencies of
cadre structure and management are discussed in Section 3. The objectives of the cadre review are
given in Section 4. Section 5 contains the broad guidelines for formulation of a Cadre Review

proposal.
 Section 2

Definitions and Concepts

Classification of Central Government Posts

1. The civil service of the Central Government is organised into four groups, viz. Group ‘A'
(which includes All India Services), Group ‘B' and Group *C'. Such classification broadly corresponds
to the rank, status and the degree of the level of responsibility attached to the posts. Group ‘A' posts
carry higher administrative and executive responsibilities and include senior management positions in
the Ministries/Departments and field organizations. The middle and junior levels of Group *A' along
with Group ‘B' constitute middle management. Group °C’ posts perform supervisory as well as
operative tasks and render clerical assistances in Ministries and field organizations and also for
carrying out routine duties. The Central Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965

provide a concrete and specific criterion for classification of posts in terms of pay.

The service concept

2. An important characteristic of the civil service system at the Centre is its classification based
on the concept of the Service. Under this concept, civilian posts are grouped into distinct homogenous
cadres under a common Service named on the basis of specific functions attached to the posts in
question. The Study Team on Personnel Administration appointed by the Administrative Reforms
Commission (1969) appropriately defined a cadre as follows:-
“A cadre comprises persons who have been adjudged suitable and recruited to hold a group of
positions requiring similar skills - technical, professional and/or administrative; within a
Service there may be more than one grade arranged vertically according to the level of
responsibility’
2.1 Having laid down the working definition of a Service or cadre as above, the Study Team went
on to spell out the specific requirements for the constitution of a Service as:-
= determining duties and responsibilities of various positions;
" translating these in terms of skill requirements;
«grouping of positions which broadly require similar skills; and
= gradation of position in terms of responsibilities.
2.2 According to the Study Team, the concept so developed further presupposes that within a
Service, positions at same level are analogous and any member of the service qualified to hold that
grade or position can be posted. Thus, while constituting a Service, positions are not only examined
with reference to skill requirement and are graded but it is also determined whether those positions are

also inter-changeable. As this Monograph is concerned with Group “A' Services/Cadres of the Central

2
 Government, the concept will be further explained in the following paragraphs with specific reference
to Group “A' Services. :

3. A Central Group *A' Service represents a group of posts belonging to a distinct functional area
arranged in a hierarchical order representing different grades or levels of responsibility. All the posts
in the Service carry the same functions involving specific skills. They are thus uni-functional. They
only differ in rank and status corresponding to given levels of responsibility attached to different
grades of posts. The hierarchical arrangement of posts along with the pay scales attached to different
grades constitutes what may be called a cadre and the arrangement itself is known as a cadre structure.
4, Members of a Service are expected to possess an intimate knowledge of the particular area or
the function or the skill concerned. For example, the Central Engineering Service (CES) is the name
of a service whose members are all civil engineers performing functions in the area of Engineering.
To become a member of CES, it is essential that one should possess a basic qualification on the
subject matter, i.e. engineering. At successively higher levels in a functional area, as the managerial
content and the responsibility steadily increase, the members themselves will belong to different
grades corresponding to different levels of responsibility and carrying different scales of pay.

Dy There are three All-India Services which are all Group ‘A' Services, namely, the Indian
Administrative Service, Indian Police Service and Indian Forest Service. These are common to the
Centre and the States. The manpower for performing the functions of the Central Government is,
however, mainly provided by Central Services and cadres. The Central Group ‘A' Services account
for the bulk of the Group *A' posts under the Central Government. They are broadly classified into (1)
Non-Technical service, (II) Technical Service (which include engineering services), (III) Health
Services and (IV) Other Services (which include some engineering and scientific services).

6. The non-technical services are meant to administer non-technical areas of administration at the
Centre like audit, income-tax, posts and railways. The technical services perform similar functions on
the technical side of the Central Government in departments like Civil Engineering, Telecom
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, etc. The Group ‘A' category also includes officers engaged in
research in the scientific and technological fields besides isolated - so called General Central Services

- posts in the non-technical fields.

Duty Posts and Reserves

Ts A well-structured Group “A' cadre consists of two distinct parts: (i) Regular Duty Posts and (ii)
Reserves. The regular duty posts which constitute the core of the cadre are meant for performing the
functions for which the service has been constituted. As mentioned above, the duty posts are
structured into different levels of hierarchy in the time scale, junior administrative grade, senior

administrative grade, etc. corresponding to different levels of responsibility. Incidentally, it is the
 structure of the regular duty posts which is examined in a cadre review along with need of Reserves, if
any.
8. The reserves are of four types, viz. (i) probationers reserve (ii) leave reserve (iii) training
reserve and (iv) deputation reserve. Every organised service normally provides for probationers
reserve in order to cater to the requirements of probation which has to be undergone by direct recruits
to the service. Probationers reserve cannot be considered part of regular duty posts of a service as they
are not intended to perform the regular service functions. Officers undergoing probationary training
are shown against probationer reserve. The strength of reserve depends upon the size of the normal
annual intake through direct recruitment and the period of probation required to be put in by direct
recruits. The other reserves, namely leave, training and deputation reserves are intended to serve as
substitute for regular duty posts in the event of service officers holding duty posts being temporarily
away from their cadre on leave, training or deputation. That is, it is expected that at any time there
will be some officers who are on leave, deputation or training. In order that the work does not suffer
due to their absence, extra posts are provided. The various types of reserves including probations
reserve are usually created in the junior time scale.
> Probationers Reserve

Direct recruits are normally given initial training for periods ranging from one year to three

years or as decided by the cadre controlling authorities, while on probation. The posts against

which they are shown during the training period, which includes post-entry institutional as

well as on-job training should not be included in the strength of regular duty posts, but should

be shown separately as probationers reserve. In case such reserve already forms part of junior

duty posts or other reserves, necessary adjustment will have to be made to show it as a

separate reserve.

> Other Reserves

‘Other’ reserves comprise leave, training and deputation reserves. There is an important

difference between the probationers reserve and ‘other’ reserves. The former is set apart for a

definite category of service personnel. viz. fresh recruits directly appointed to the lowest rung

of the Service. The latter serve a more general purpose of providing substitutes against

vacancies caused due to Service officers proceeding on long leave, training or deputation.

Those reserves are needed in order to ensure that the regular duty posts are continuously

manned by competent officers and are ordinarily created in the entry grade of the Service.

© Leave Reserve
Actual utilisation of leave by officers (for at least 45 days at a time) and the
utilisation of the existing leave reserve (if any) by the Department during the

preceding 3 to 5 years should normally determine the size of leave reserve. In

4
 addition, the practicability of filling up of leave vacancies, especially where the
duty posts are widely scattered over field formations, may also be examined while

determining desired size of the leave reserve.

Training Reserve

The imperative need for imparting on the job refresher/ professional training
periodically to the personnel at various levels of the Service in order to equip them
to meet the growing challenges of developmental administration can hardly be
over-emphasised. For this purpose, a training reserve of an appropriate size will
have to be provided for the cadre structure. The size is to be worked out on the
basis of past experience (of, say, the last 5 years) and a well drawn-out programme

for training of officers over the next 5 years.

Deputation Reserve

Officers of organised Service are in constant demand for manning posts on
deputations in the Secretariat and other Headquarter Organisations, Public Sector
undertakings etc. Spells of deputation to such ex-cadre posts afford the officers an
opportunity to apply and test their knowledge, skills and talents in new fields and
situations. Deputation also helps in imparting fresh outlook to their work on return
to their organisation. However, while sending officers on deputation, it should be
ensured that the essential needs of the service are not sacrificed, nor does it give
rise to distortions in the recruitment programme or to other cadre management
problems. Normally sending officer on deputation should not be allowed in case of
existing vacancies in the service particularly in the same grade. As regards the size
of the deputation reserve, it may be fixed in the light of past experience and the
estimated minimum number of officers likely to be away on deputation during the
next five years. Once the size of deputation reserve is fixed, a conscious effort
should be made to see that there is neither over-utilisation nor under-utilisation so

as to avoid problems in the smooth management of the cadre.

8.1 The DoPT has issued guidelines on percentage of officers on various reserves and that should

be kept in mind while finalizing the number of officers in Reserves. At present, the following norms

for Reserves are prescribed in the Organised Group ‘A’ Central Services:

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Training Reserves — Not exceeding 1.5% of Senior Duty Posts

Leave Reserves — Not exceeding 1.5% of Senior Duty Posts

Deputation Reserves - Not exceeding 5% of Senior Duty Posts

(Fixation of Deputation Reserves should be guided by the number of officers on

deputation).
 (iv) Probationary Reserves- It should be equivalent to the period of probation prescribed

multiplied with the normal batch of Direct Recruit officers.

The Cadre Controlling Authorities of Organised Group ‘A’ Central Services are required to
keep these norms in view while formulating proposals for cadre review. The Reserve requirements of
the services having higher reserve provision than the above should be reviewed in Cadre Review
keeping in mind the past utilisation of reserves and the vacancy position.

Recruitment

9. Recruitment is made to a ‘Service’ rather than to a post, at least in so far as organised services
are concerned. In general, recruitment to a Group ‘A' Service takes place at the lowest level, i.e. at the
level of Junior Time Scale which may be called the entry point. There are generally two sources of
recruitment, viz. (a) direct recruitment i.e. recruitment from the open market through an open
competitive examination or an interview or a combination of the two and (b) recruitment through
promotion from the Group *B' cadre.

10. Direct recruitment to all non-technical Group ‘A’ Services is made through a combined
competitive examination (Civil Service Examination) conducted by the Union Public Service
Commission on an annual basis. Candidates selected for different services as a result of this
examination are trained in the functional fields to which they are subsequently allotted. As regards
technical services, there is a different type of combined competitive examination also conducted by
the U.P.S.C, in different areas of specialization, e.g, Civil Engineering, Economics, ete.

11, In the case of departmental promotion (from Group “B' feeder cadres) to Group ‘A' the
promotion quota for the purpose varies from Service to Service. Above the level of Junior Time Scale,
posts/vacancies are generally filled through promotion from the next lower levels. There are, however,
a few exceptions in which lateral entry (i.e. direct recruitment from open market) takes place at levels
higher than junior/senior time scale, Such lateral entry is generally through an interview (without a
written test). In a few cases promotion of Group ‘B' Officers is effected directly to the senior scale of
the concerned Group ‘A' Service, the junior scale posts being exclusively confined to direct recruits

from the open market.

Cadre Structure

12. _A typical uni-functional Group ‘A’ Service has a cadre structure which is constituted in the
form of a pyramid with its various layers corresponding to different levels of responsibilities with no
functional distinction. The pyramid starts with Junior Time Scale, which is generally a probation-
cum-training grade for direct recruits, and passes through Senior Time Scale, Junior Administrative

Grade and Senior Administrative Grade (and higher levels). In a number of services, a Selection
 Grade also exists as part of Junior Administrative Grade. In some cases, it is functional and in others
it is non-functional.
13. The feasibility of evolving a model or ideal pyramid for adoption by cadre authorities for the
cadre structures of the Services under their control has been examined in depth. It must be understood
that functional justifications and not considerations of promotional opportunities play a paramount
role in deciding the proportion of posts in different grades in a given cadre. This stipulation precludes
any concept of an ideal pyramid towards which cadre controlling authority could attempt to move. No
attempt has been made to build or suggest a model pyramid for the cadre structure of various
organised Group *A' Services.
14. At the same time, certain broad parameters may be suggested for the guidance of the cadre
controlling authorities while working out the cadre review proposals.
These are:
a) All direct recruits shall be promoted to the senior time scale from junior time scale
around say Sth or 6th year.
b) A large proportion of direct recruits in the senior time scale shall be promoted to the
JAG (period varying from service to service, often significantly).
c) A significant proportion of the direct recruits in the JAG shall see their way to SAG
and some to HAG/HAG+.
15. In general, the number of posts at the base level, i.e. at the level of time-scale posts, is much
larger than those at the middle (JAG) and the top (SAG & above). Officers joining a particular service
have certain expectations from the service in terms of going up the ladder through different stages of
the hierarchy within reasonable intervals of time. If the cadre pyramid is steep, obviously the
promotional opportunities for individual members of the service would be limited. On the other hand,
in a structure which is not so steep, one can expect reasonable promotional opportunities for members
of the Service. Thus, the degree of realization of career expectations by members of a service is
essentially a function of the degree of steepness of the service pyramid. Needless to say, the Services
which have better career prospects in terms of promotion tend to be more preferred by the prospective
candidates. Two other concepts viz. structural ratios and threshold analysis related to cadre structure

are relevant. These are discussed below.

Structural ratios
16. In a cadre structure, different grades have different sizes (in terms of number of posts). The
ratios between different grades in the Services i.e. between the sizes of any two grades or

combinations of different grades (including the total cadre strength) may be termed as structural
 ratios. To illustrate, the following are some of the structural ratios which have been found useful in
analyzing the cadre review proposals.

* The ratio of Junior Administrative Grade posts to time-scale posts (junior and

senior time scale combined);

® The ratio of all posts in the JAG and above to time-scale posts;

«The ratio of JAG posts to total cadre strength;

" The ratio of Senior Administrative Grade (SAG) posts (and above) to JAG; and

«The ratio of SAG posts (and above) to total cadre strength.
17. These ratios reveal the type of cadre pyramid that a given service has and indicate the extent of
promotional opportunities available to its members. Thus, the higher the ratio between Senior
Administrative Grade posts and total cadre strength, the better are the promotional opportunities for
members of a given Service especially at the level of JAG. On the other hand, the lower the ratio of
JAG posts to time-scale posts, the slower would be the promotion prospects of a new entrant to a
Service. However, good structural ratios by themselves cannot ensure smooth promotion of the
members of the cadre. In practice it is observed that even with very good structural ratios members of
some cadres are stagnating in various grades due to over recruitments in the past. On the other hand,
in some cadres with not so good structural ratios, vacancies in the higher grades have remained
unfilled due to non-availability of eligible officers. The latter situation is due to past under-
recruitments. Over or under recruitments and their adverse consequences can be avoided by ensuring
regular annual direct recruitment at an optimum fixed rate. In a cadre review, there is little scope for
remedying the damages caused to the cadre due to unplanned recruitments in the past.
18. There cannot be an identical cadre structure for every service for obvious reasons and the
Department of Personnel and Training has never intended to recommend any. The Fifth Central Pay
Commission has suggested an ideal or rather a normative cadre structure as per which on a scale of
hundred Senior Duty Posts (Total Strength-Reserves-number of posts at Junior Time Scale), the
recommended strength at HAG is three, at SAG is seventeen, at NFSG is twenty, at JAG is thirty and
at STS is thirty.

03 i HAG

17 Senior Administrative Grade

20 Non Functional Grade __

30 Junior Administrative Grade
30 eS -— Senior Time Scale __ ees
 This cadre structure, however, presupposes other elements of cadre management also
to be ideal like recruitment, attrition, promotions, provision and utilization of reserve etc. Any
deviation in these aspects has to have bearing on cadre structure. However, in some of the grades, like
NFSG, DoPT has fixed norms which should be strictly followed. This cadre structure, however, does
not propose any normative percentage at Junior Time Scale level. The number of officers at JTS
should be guided by requirement of the Service at entry level and careers aspiration of the feeder
grade to together provide a base for the Senior Time Scale. As such the strength at JTS may be kept at
30% in a cadre where there is separate provision of Reserves and in case the Reserves are part of JTS,
the same should be kept around 40%. However, there is nothing to suggest that the cadre structure be
restricted in the same manner as detailed in normative percentage, except at the NFSG level where
DoPT has issued ceiling limits on the percentage of posts to be operated at this level. The ceiling of
NFSG is 30% of the Senior Duty Posts (i.e. number of posts at Senior Time Scale and above in the
cadre). Moreover, functional requirement has, in any case, to be the key criterion and needs to be
assessed objectively. There should be thus a serious attempt to anticipate the organization’s role five
years down the line and to correlate it with the changing needs of the service/cadre.

19. The internal structure of a service depends on the initial structure and the pattern of subsequent
recruitment. As stated, it is neither necessary nor desirable to prescribe standard ratios between
different levels of the cadre structure of a Service that would satisfy functional requirements and
ensure adequate promotional opportunities. Every individual cadre controlling authority will have to
carefully consider the cadre structure of the Service under its control on its own merits so as to
broadly determine the desirable structure in terms of both functional needs and career opportunities
for members of the Service. The basic approach in a cadre review is to balance these two aspects so as

to maintain a high level of morale and efficiency consistent with economy.

Threshold analysis

20. This is an analysis of the time taken by an entrant of a given Service (normally at Junior Time
Scale level) to reach different levels of the hierarchy i.e. JAG, SAG etc. The thresholds in a given
cadre structure can be derived on the basis of past experience. As regards the future, i.e. the threshold
likely to be realized at the end of the review period in a structure under revision, the same will have to
be estimated on the basis of the proposed strength of different grades and the latest seniority list of the
officers of the Service. Threshold analysis is quite useful in correctly assessing the situation regarding
promotion prospects. No norms, however, have been or could be laid down in this regard too. One has
to base one's perception on the situation prevailing in a number of other services/cadres particularly

those which are functionally or otherwise akin to the cadre under review.
 Attributes of an ideal cadre

21. The concept of a regular Group ‘A' Service, the way it is constituted, and its grade structure
have been explained earlier. The various attributes of an ideal cadre of a Central Group ‘A! Service
ate elaborated in the following paragraphs with specific reference to the existing structures, their
deficiencies, the need to rectify them through periodical reviews and the methodology of the review
exercises.

a) The functional needs of a regularly constituted service ought to be fully met by cadre
posts without having to take recourse to ex-cadre posts. Conversely, cadre posts should
entirely cater to the functional requirements of the Service and should not be utilised
for performing functions other those for which the Service is intended;

b) The grades into which the cadre is divided should be clearly distinct in the sense that
each carries a distinct level of responsibility within the functional area of the concerned
service. The posts within a grade should also be inter-changeable;

c) The cadre structure should facilitate smooth mobility for its members both horizontally
and vertically. Thus, while the posts in the same grade may be inter-changeable, any
member of a grade should be capable of moving up and discharging the duties of a post
in a higher grade;

d) An ideal cadre should be capable of fulfilling the legitimate career expectations of the
member of the Service. The expectations, however, have to be in harmony with the
functional needs of a Service; and

e) Every cadre structure should have separate provision for various types of reserves like

probation, training, leave and deputation.

The Organised Group ‘A’ Central Service
22. An Organized Group ‘A’ Service is the Group ‘A’ Central Service which is constituted and
declared consciously as such by the Cadre controlling Authorities through the established procedure
and complies with the Attributes of Organised Group ‘A’ Services. The Attributes of such services are
defined by the Cadre Review Division from time-to-time. Such declaration of status as Organized
Group ‘A’ Service for new service/yet to be declared as OGAS follows the procedure prescribed for
cadre review. Salient features of such services are as under:
(i) The highest cadre post in such services is not below the level of Rs. 37400-67000 plus
Grade pay of Rs.10000 (SAG);
(ii) Such services have all the standard grades namely, Rs. 15600-39100 plus Grade pay
Rs.5400 (JTS), Rs. 15600-39100 plus Grade pay Rs.6600 (STS), Rs. 15600-39100 plus

10
 (iii)

iv)

(v)

(vi)

Grade pay Rs.7600/Rs. 37400-67000 plus Grade pay of Rs.8700 (JAG/NFSG) and Rs.
37400-67000 plus Grade pay of Rs.10000 (SAG);

At least 50% of the vacancies in Junior Time Scale (JTS) in such services are required to
be filled by direct recruitment;

All the vacancies above JTS and upto SAG level in such services are filled up by
promotion from the next lower grade;

While a service may comprise one or more distinct cadre (s), all such cadres should be
governed by composite Service Rules facilitating horizontal and vertical movement of
officers of a particular cadre at least up to SAG level. The cadre posts of an Organized
Service expressly belong to that service. The posts not belonging to any service are
classified as General Central Service and, therefore, an Organized Group ‘A’ Service
cannot have posts/grades classified as General Central Service.

Such a service consists of two distinct components, namely Regular Duty Posts and
Reserves. The Reserves are generally of four types, viz (i) Probationary Reserves, (ii)
Leave Reserve, (iii) Training Reserve and (iv) Deputation Reserve. The various types of

reserves are usually created and accounted for in the Junior Time Scale.

Any deviation from these salient features may be examined on case to case basis, owing to

respective functional requirements of the service/cadre.

Ad
 Section 3

General deficiencies of cadre structure and management

It is a common knowledge that a number of organised Group *A' Central Services have cadre
structures that do not accord with one or more of the various requirements of an ideal cadre structure,
Certain distortions have crept in some services over a period owing primarily to inadequate cadre
management and irregular recruitment. Some of the deficiencies noticed in the cadre structures of
organised services are detailed below.

(i) Poor recruitment planning: For smooth and proper cadre management, advance projections
of manpower requirements should be undertaken at least once in a period of five years. Improper
recruitment planning may lead to under-recruitment, over recruitment or other ad-hoc measures.
Promotion blocks occur due to large scale recruitment carried out after a spell of prolonged under
recruitment. This causes frustration among service officers resulting in loss of morale and motivation.
Unplanned or haphazard recruitment also leads to avoidable strain on organisational facilities during
the years of bulk recruitment and under-utilisation of facilities during years of under recruitment.

(ii) Lack of functional clarity: In some cadres, the functional needs and requirements of the
service are skipped, and members are assigned functions which are strictly not in the operational area
of the concerned service. This distorts the original objectives of the Service, erodes its functional role
and renders the Service ineffective. In some cases, a large number of functional posts are found
outside a functional Service, e.g. Indian Economic Service, Members of the Service are often deputed
to ex-cadre posts in the same functional area. It is desirable that all ex-cadre posts be merged into
appropriate Service as far as possible.

(iii) Deficient cadre structure- A well constituted cadre is one that fulfills both the functional
objectives of the Service and legitimate career aspiration of its members, It, however, depends on how
the cadre has been structured at the time of the constitution of the Service and the manner in which it
has been maintained. The cadre controlling authorities are sometimes compelled to resort to ad-hoc
measures because functional requirements of the Organization concerned are not accurately
anticipated or there are abrupt bottlenecks in promotions. Obviously, in a structure which is too wide
at the bottom or even at the middle level tapering off to a very narrow top, promotional avenues for its
members are severely restricted causing frustration among them and reducing the effectiveness of the
Service.

(iv) Poor provision of reserves: Another serious lacuna of some organised cadres is the lack of
provision for one or other types of reserves giving rise to cadre management bottlenecks.

(v) Absence of recruitment rules: There are some services which do not have proper and
updated recruitment rules.

12
 (vi) Non-maintenance of statistical profile: There are some services which do not maintain up to
date statistical profile. This adversely effects cadre management and leads to adhoc arrangements. Up
to date maintenance of statistical profile helps in cadre management and makes decision making

easier for the cadre controlling authorities.

13)
 Section 4

Objectives of a Cadre Review

1. The main objective of a cadre review has traditionally been to strike a healthy balance between
the functional requirements and career progression. It need not be emphasized that a satisfied
workforce leads to its enhanced efficiency and sense of belongingness and thereby benefits the
organization immensely. The purpose of a cadre review is to restructure a cadre in such a manner as to
remove the deficiencies, which might have been missed at the time of the constitution of a service or
have crept in subsequently, and ensure that the cadre structure satisfies the functional, structural and
personnel considerations. Cadre Review provides an opportunity to overcome bottlenecks, remove
existing distortions, bring about rationalization of cadre structure and business process re-engineering
etc. so as to improve the efficiency and morale of the cadre officers and enhance the effectiveness of
the service in the fulfillment of the objectives for which it has been established and assigned roles and

duties from time-to-time. Generally speaking, the objectives of a cadre review are to:

a) estimate future manpower requirements on a scientific basis for a period of 5 years at a
time;
b) plan recruitment in such a way as to avoid future promotional blocks and at the same

time prevent gaps from building up;
c) restructure the cadre to harmonize the functional needs with the legitimate career
expectations of its members; and
d) enhance the effectiveness of the service.
2 However, as discussed above, there has been a continuous and significant change in the very
concept of governance. Some issues relevant to cadre management in the context of changes in
governance are discussed in the following paragraphs:
(i) Functional requirement Vs career expectation- Cadre management is about reconciling
expectation of every member of service that (s)he would steadily climb up the ladder and the
limitation imposed by pyramidal structure of cadres which allows only a few to reach the top rungs of
the ladder. The pyramidal organization structure is dictated by the need that the operational work at
the bottom level requires a larger number who are supervised by a few, and who in turn are controlled
and directed by even fewer. Equally importantly, a ‘promotion’ is important from the stand point of
individual member as it signifies:
* A financial upgradation (more disposable income);
« Higher responsibilities leading to greater job satisfaction and fulfillment; and
= Improved social standing.
While financial upgradation and improved social standing are important, higher

responsibilities and job satisfaction are probably no less important for motivation of members of a '
14
 service. Improved social standing is generally associated with designation. Unlike in private sector
where an expansion in the business leads to more openings at the top of the ladder, in the government
any expansion would increase the strength in terms of functional hierarchy. Ideally, after assessment
of functional requirements, the duties and responsibilities attached to various posts may be realigned
with a view to optimizing the use of human resource and at the same to ensuring smooth career
progression.

The number of subordinates that a superior officer supervises should be a critical criterion for
justifying a position at the higher levels. Also, the role and responsibilities of different levels vary
with the lower levels (Group B & C) fulfilling operational needs; JTS / STS and JAG providing
middle level management and SAG and above providing the leadership to the organization. In a
number of cases, the cadre controlling authorities propose increase of posts at higher levels by
reducing posts at lower levels to mitigate stagnation. This step adversely affects the effectiveness of
the Service due to reduction of officers at the execution level of the cadre. The policy makers and
executioners, both are important and this should be kept in mind while formulating proposals.
Moreover, functional justification is the key criteria for consideration of such proposals.

(ii) | Zero base reviews: A zero base review helps in optimum utilization of resources. While
assessing the increase in workload or expansion of the Organization, it is equally important to identify
the practices and processes that might have or would become redundant or that might be combined to
save resources. The cadre controlling authority is best placed to do such an assessment.

(iii) | Stagnation not adequate ground for cadre review: Stagnation is a relevant but not the sole
ground for creation of posts at higher levels. The problem of stagnation stands somewhat mitigated
after introduction of Non-Functional Upgradation (NFU) and it needs to be considered while
assessing impact of stagnation. It cannot, anyway, be solved by creating posts at higher levels which
will only mean that everybody will be doing work one below his level all along the hierarchy. Thus,
the cadre restructuring must be supported with functional alignments to avoid under-utilization.

(iv) Demand for competitive upward mobility- There is a sense of injustice when a Service sees
itself as not having as good a structural ratio or thresholds as some other service. This leads to
competitive pressure to match the structural ratio or threshold limits of another service. Such a
demand may also arise when the promotional avenues are compared with the following norms:

Grade Structural Ratio Yoage of Duty Posts Year

STS 30 5
JAG 30 9
NFSG 20 14
SAG 17 17
HAG 3 25

15
 However, the comparison of structural ratios and thresholds may not always be logical as each
Service is placed differently with reference to its role, capacity and future growth and so on. In some
services the need for higher level posts may be dictated by the equation with the client. Similarly,
span of control may vary from Service to Service. While a bottom-up approach would be needed in
some cases, a top down approach may be required in others

With the introduction of Non-Functional Upgradation (NFU) in Organised Group ‘A’
Services, the demand for competitive mobility has been met at least in terms of financial upgradation.
(v) Need for adequate recruitment planning- By far, the major exercise involved in a cadre
review should consist of projection of future manpower requirements. This would indicate the total
size of vacancies likely to arise in the cadre over the review period and its distribution into different
levels or different grades of the service. The total additional manpower requirement over the review
period is the sum total of (i) maintenance needs (ii) growth needs and (iii) a portion of the gap
proposed to be made up during the period. Maintenance needs (which arise out of wastages due to
retirements, resignations, etc.), can be fairly accurately worked out. In fact, normal wastage due to
retirements can perfectly be calculated from date of birth data. Even abnormal, wastage due to
resignations, etc, can be estimated with a small margin of error on the basis of past experience. It is,
however, not always possible to accurately project growth needs, as this involves an element of
forecasting. Nonetheless it is essential for balanced cadre management that growth needs should also.
be as accurately assessed as possible. It must be emphasised in this connection that some amount of
increase in work has to be treated as normal and should not lead to any increase in the manpower
requirements, Only perceptible and significant increases in activity should be translated into
additional personnel requirements. Having estimated the essential additional needs, the levels or
grades at which such needs arise should be clearly identified. It should also be clearly assessed
whether the additional requirements would have to be in the nature of creation of new posts or
upgrading some of the existing posts.

Increase in work-load could be quantitative or qualitative or both. A quantitative increase in
work-load indicates creation of additional posts at required levels. Where the nature of work at certain
levels is expected to undergo change, proposals for upgrading could be justified. The identification of
each additional post required (either by way of fresh addition, to the cadre or through upgrading an
existing post) in terms of specific duties, at least at the level of Junior Administrative Grade and
above, would be of considerable value in a cadre review proposal. As far as possible, work norms in
terms of duties and responsibilities should be unambiguously set out to justify the proposed additions,

An organizational chart will be of added value.

16
 Filling up of gaps regularly is an important aspect of cadre management. As far as possible,

gaps should be avoided, and in any case, gaps should not be allowed to accumulate over long periods
which could induce the cadre authority to resort to ad-hoc measures or other easy solutions to deal
with the situation. It should, however, be ensured that gaps in the cadre are made good in a phased
manner rather than attempt to wipe out the entire gap in one single sweep. For example, any excessive
recruitment in a particular year results in dilution of the quality of recruits in short run and lead to
promotion blocks at a later stage.
(vi) | Need for managing reserves - If the cadre structure already has provision for various types of
reserves like probation, leave, training and deputation, it should be examined as to (a) how such
reserves have been utilized in the past and (b) what would be the future pattern of utilization. The
review should provide an opportunity to identify posts which are usually being manned by reserves
due to inadequate provision of duty posts for existing activities or because of expansion of regular
activities or both.

If no provision exists for reserves in the initial constitution of the Service, it should be
examined as to the extent that different types of reserves will now have to be provided for in the
revised structures in the light of past experience and anticipated requirements over the review period.
(vii) Encadrement of ex-cadre posts- Often departments create for various reasons, a number of
posts having more or less similar functional duties and responsibilities as the cadre posts. Such posts
are manned by both cadre officers and those outside the cadre(s). It should be the constant endeavour
of Cadre Authorities to periodically review the position regarding such posts with a view to encadre
them keeping in view:

(a) the nature of functions and responsibilities attached to them.

(b) the likelihood of their continuing:

(c) the desirability of deploying cadre officers to such posts.

(viii) Budget Neutrality —The requirement of budget neutrality has to be understood in the correct
perspective. While discouraging any liberal creation of posts, it seeks to ensure that any increase in
the net expenditure has to be in correspondence with increase in output or horizontal expansion in
activities.

(ix) Skill gap- Since on an average, the interval between two successive cadre review is more than
five years, it is essential to visualize the Organizational role five years hence and to assess the skill
gaps of officers that would be required to be plugged by way of capacity building. Therefore, this
factor should invariably form a part of cadre review proposal.

(x) Constitution of New Service: The cadre review exercises being carried out in respect of a
number of Central Group ‘A’ Services and the guidelines formulated and circulated for the purpose

have not only succeeded in bringing out a positive attitude among the various cadre controlling

17
 authorities as already mentioned, they have also created an awareness among members of various
other cadres, which have not been constituted into a Service or an organised service on the principles
of scientific management. A number of departments have constituted regular service/cadres wherever
they were functionally viable. The cadre controlling authorities also explore the feasibility of merger
of services, wherever feasible, to explore the scientific cadre management and better utilization of the
officers. The Cadre Review Division has been processing such proposals for formation of a service
and grant of Organised Group ‘A’ Service status in the same manner as prescribed for cadre review,
For formulation of a service/cadre, the basic concept of service as elaborated above may be kept in
mind and while formulating the proposal of grant of Organised Group ‘A’ Service status, the
attributes of the same should be followed to the extent possible.

(xi) Creation of Posts without cadre review: Normally addition to a cadre by way of increasing the
number of posts at different levels should be considered only in the course of five year cadre review.
Mid review changes should be avoided as far as possible. Regular cadre reviews carried out at five
years intervals must envisage such eventualities while making advance projections for the five year
period of additional manpower requirements. Accordingly, the need for creating posts, encadrement
and upgradation of posts not envisaged by the Cadre Review Committee before the next cadre is due,
can be expected to be rare. In the event, however, of such eventuality, it may be ensured that the
additional posts so created conform to the cadre strouture most recently approved by the Cadre
Review Committee. The adhoc measures of creation, encadrement, upgradation of posts are not
supported if the Cadre Review is due, however, there cannot be any rigidity in this regard and in case
of unseen exigencies, if such a proposal is moved, this should be taken up with the Cadre Review
Division of the DoPT as well as the Department of Expenditure alongwith the justification and
reasons for not being able to wait for the next cadre review.

(xiii) Declaration of dying service/cadre: In a number of cases, due to business process re-
engineering, automation of business process, change in mandate etc., the Department may no longer
require a Central Group A service. In such cases, declaration of such service as dying cadre is done,
Any such proposal may be finalized ideally through the process of cadre review so that its impact is
examined.

(xiv) Dealing with vacancies: In a number of cadres, there are large number of vacancies which rise
to adoption of adhoc measures for filling them. The cadre controlling authorities should review the
vacancies regulalry not only for their filling up process but also for the continuance of such posts. It is
better to surrender the posts which are not feasible to be filled in long ran rather than continuing them

through adhoc measures after assessment of its impact on the functioning of the organisation.

18
 Section-5

Broad Guidelines for formulation of cadre review proposal

The overall approach to cadre strength review has recently been reexamined and experience
has shown that Cadre Controlling Authorities do not always present coherent proposals with plausible
functional justification, Often they tend to justify their proposals for upgradation or creation of
additional posts in terms of improving promotional prospects of the members of the Service. It has
been repeatedly emphasized in the earlier chapters of this Monograph that improvement of
promotional opportunities is not the sole objective of cadre management. Any changes proposed in
the respective strength of different grades of a cadre under review will have to be backed by adequate
functional justification. It is thus established that there is a need to bring in a qualitative shift in the
manner the cadre reviews are done and that the issues discussed above need to be considered while
formulating a cadre review proposal. In house assessment of the cadre as a whole, fundamental
changes proposed, long term issues, planning etc should be carried out preferably by forming a
Committee, A checklist of issues that must be elucidated in a proposal for cadre review is given
below.

1. Functional Aspect

1.1 Organizational Changes- A cadre review provides an opportunity to take a fresh look at
the cadre in the light of changes that have taken place within the organization as also in the outside
environment. It should be examined whether the organization has undergone any material changes
on account of the following:

(a) Outsourcing- The functions outsourced or planned to be outsourced and the impact on the
manpower requirements should be spelt out clearly.

(b) Automation of business processes- The proposal should take into account the increasing use
of ICT Tools in the areas like accounting, tendering, inventory management, internal processing, data
management etc and its impact on the cadre strength.

(c) Business Process Reengineering- Likewise, it needs to be examined if the reengineering of
business processes done or intended would have an impact on the cadre strength. The changes in
business processes may require redistribution of posts and responsibilities leading to significant
structural changes in the cadre.

(d) Change in the mandate- As discussed earlier, the Government has withdrawn itself from
direct involvement in many areas and is encouraging Public Private Partnership in still others. It thus
becomes imperative to see if there has been any shift in the mandate itself.

1.2 Justification for higher/additional posts- The cadre review should consider the needs of

the whole organization and not merely that of the Service. All Group A services occupy the top layer

19
 of civil services. These layers are interdependent and therefore the needs of the Service should be seen

in the overall organizational context.

2. Personnel Aspect

2.1 Recruitment Planning- Rate of recruitment to a cadre depends upon function of the Service
and maintenance and growth needs of the Service. A third important factor that determine recruitment
size is the quantum of ‘gaps’, i.e. the number of vacancies remaining unfilled for a period of one year
or more. It would be convenient to discuss recruitment plan under the three main heads representing
the three basic components, viz. maintenance needs, growth needs and gaps. While drawing up the

recruitment plan, promotion prospects will also have to be kept in view.
qa) Estimation of maintenance needs

Maintenance needs arise out of normal (due to retirements on superannuation) and abnormal
(due to resignations) deaths, dismissals, etc.) wastages. In particular some Group ‘B' officers likely
to be promoted to the Service during the next five years may be retiring within the period of review.
To smooth out violent annual fluctuations, if any, an average of the next 5 years should be taken to
represent the maintenance requirements of the Service/cadre on account of normal retirement. As
regards abnormal needs to resignation, dismissals, deaths, etc., this may be estimated on the basis of

actual experience during the past five years.
(ii) Estimation of growth needs

Each cadre controlling authority should have a reasonable estimate of the future growth rate
of personnel say, over the next 5 years. The actual retirements for the next five years (ie. the period
of the five-year review) will have to be worked out as possible. In general, the growth needs of a

service will have to be assessed under the following components: -
(a) Normal growth of work in the current functional fields;
(b) New functions/schemes likely to be undertaken
(c) Policy-induced changes relating to:
i) Organisation/Structure;
ii) Personnel Policy; and

iii) Administrative/procedural reforms.

20
 Rate of increase in work load within the existing functions of the service may be studied
with reference to past trends and projected progress of on-going schemes/programmes during the
next five years. Normal growth in work should not generally lead to any significant increase in
number of posts unless it can be demonstrated on the basis of quantitative norms that increase in

work has a direct bearing on staff strength.

Along with progress of on-going schemes, some of which may taper off during the next few
years and thereby reduce the requirement of staff on them, a careful study should be made of new
programmes/ projects and activities likely to be taken up during the next five years. Necessary

correlation between financial and physical targets and staff requirements should be established.

Policy changes in the personnel field also have an impact on future growth of personnel.
Some policy decisions may have been taken or likely to be taken which will have an important
bearing on the functions, organisation and structure of the Department/Service. Likely impact of all

such changes on the cadre strength should be carefully assessed.

A note of caution may be sounded here. The projection of future requirements is not
necessarily an extrapolation of past trends for the simple reason that the past conditions might not
hold good in the future. Policy changes recently introduced or likely to be introduced often
influence the future behaviour pattern of the trend which may not be amenable to quantification.
Nevertheless, backed by enlightened judgement and past experience, the cadre authority should still

be in a position to assess the growth rate within a reasonable narrow margin of error.
(iii) Under Recruitment resulting in ‘gap'

A ‘gap' may be defined as the size of regular vacancies in the cadre persisting continuously
for more than a recruitment year, even though such vacancies might have been filled by ad-hoc
appointments. Regular vacancies are long-term vacancies which are required to be filled on a
regular basis in accordance with the Recruitment Rules. The main causes of the gaps which usually

accumulate in the lowest rung of the service are:-
a) Non-availability of suitable candidates;

b) Deliberate under-recruitment so as to avoid promotion blocks at a later stage or for other

reasons; and

c) Defects in recruitment planning, such as failure to make proper allowance for abnormal

wastage, delays etc.

21
 A careful examination of the causes should be made so as to arrive at a reasonable figure by

which the gap should be reduced and recruitment increased over the next five years.
(iv) Adverse effects of over or under recruitment.

Under recruitment and ad-hoc appointments should be avoided as far as possible, as these will
create distortions in the cadre. In any case, it should be ensured that ad-hoc appointments do not
persist for more than a year at the most. Where ad-hoc appointments are sizeable and have been
continuing for long periods creating problems for the Cadre Authority and adversely affecting the
morale of officers concerned, bold measures may have to be thought of, say in the directions of a
radical restructuring of the cadre, a reassessment of promotion quotas and review of recruitment

rules.

Over recruitment is as harmful, if not more, as under recruitment, The former leads to future
blockades in promotions. The scope of undoing the damages done by past over-recruitment is very
limited, The first objective of recruitment planning should, therefore, be to ensure that recruitment is
made regularly every year and the rate of annual intake by direct recruitment and promotion from
Group ‘B' is kept within a fixed optimum rate. A study carried out by the Cadre Review Division

has indicated that the optimum rate of annual intake should be 3% of the authorised cadre strength.

Ifa cadre is suffering from gross under recruitments in the past, the aforesaid optimum rate
may fall short of the number required to fill the big gap in the cadre. A sepcial method should be
adopted on a one-time basis to ensure that gap is filled without creating future blockades in
promotion. An appropriate method would be to hold a limited departmental competitive

examination of the eligible Group ‘B' officers for filling the gap by promotion.

To summarize, a long-term perspective recruitment planning is the key ingredient of cadre
review and apart from the changes in the functions described above, it should also consider the
maintenance needs of the cadre, growth needs of the cadre, quality of recruits, promotional prospects
of recruits etc, The rate of annual recruitment should be worked out so that gaps in the cadre are
adequately taken care of in a phased manner and there is no excessive recruitment in particular years
leading to dilution in the quality of recruits or block in promotion at a later stage. The five-year
recruitment plan is therefore made part of the cadre review proposal.

22 Capacity Building- A scientific plan for the development and deployment of officers in a
cadre should be devised. This plan should spell out in detail the requirement in terms of
skills/specialties, desirable experience etc. for different positions, and the various training

programmes required for the attainment of this objective. The placement of officers, in and outside

22
 the cadre, should be in line with the skills/experience acquired by them. It should, therefore, be done
after a careful screening of eligible personnel in relation to the type of posts to be filled up.

2.3. Promotional Avenues- Promotion prospects are a vital factor affecting the morale and
efficiency of the service personnel and hence the effectiveness of the cadre in discharging the role
assigned to it. This aspect will, therefore, have to be kept in view while formulating proposals for
review a cadre, The Cadre Authority will do well, therefore, to keep under constant observation the
trends of promotion/stagnation in the cadre. An assessment may be made of the anticipated promotion
prospects (as a result of cadre review) vis-a-vis existing (past) promotion trends. A realistic estimate
of likely vacancies in each grade for the next five years, drawing up a programme of DPC meetings at
regular intervals and strict adherence to planned recruitment programme will reduce the chances of
occurance of artificial bottlenecks and infuse in the minds of the Service personnel a sense of
confidence in their future. A diligent assessment of promotional avenues (threshold analysis) both
before and after the cadre review should be reflected in the proposal. It should also be ensured that the
feeder grades, if any, are not impacted adversely.

2.4 Recruitment/Service Rules-The changes required in the Recruitment/Service Rules because
of cadre review may be analyzed. A copy of updated Recruitment/Service Rules should be enclosed.
3. Structural Aspect- There cannot be a uniform structure for all the cadres and functional
requirement will always have overriding consideration. The normative cadre structure discussed
above only provides broad parameters to help in the analysis. The cadre should be appropriately
divided into Duty Posts and Reserves. It should have allowances for various reserves like Probation,
Deputation, Training, Leave etc. While the Probation Reserve depends on the average annual intake
and number of years prescribed for probation, the remaining Reserve should be projected on the basis
of actual utilization in past.

4, Financial Aspect-The introduction of Non-Functional Upgradation (Parity with IAS) has
lessened the significance of matching savings. It, however, may be noted that any proposal involving
additional financial expenditure should either by matched up with an increase in output or expansion
in the organization’s business. The calculation sheet must be enclosed with the proposal.

5. Statistical Aspect- In addition to the above said issues, cadre review requires certain
additional information also. To facilitate collection and analysis of such information, certain formats
have been devised and appended at the end of this Section. Any cadre review proposal must have
these formats duly filled and analyzed, as discussed below:

(i) The additional requirements in terms of the number of posts at different levels over the review
period should be estimated methodically as explained in the Guidelines and provided for in the
accompanying formats. In particular, the growth needs should be estimated as accurately as possible

and identified by different levels of responsibility so as to justify the proposals for creation /

23
 upgradation of posts. Such identification will have to be done at least for the grades of JAG, SAG and
above separately and their likely deployment shown over the next five years.

(ii) As it takes considerable time for the proposals to be fully processed and placed before the
Cadre Review Committee, the updated data should be made available to the Department of Personnel
and Training for incorporation in the proposal for consideration by the Cadre Review Committee. It
is, therefore, essential that various types of data furnished in the Format of the Guidelines be
invariably maintained by cadre authorities on their own and be updated as on first of January each
year. The data so updated may be made available to the Department of Personnel & Training (Cadre
Review Division) each year, irrespective of whether or not a particular cadre is under review or
proposed to be taken up for review shortly.

(iii) It may be ensured that the data given in the Format and gaps tally with the final proposals for
the reviewed structure. The various items of information provided in the forms should be checked and
cross-checked with the write-up so that consistency is ensured between various sets of data, An
arithmetical tally of existing number of posts (by different levels), posts to be created and / or
upgraded, wastages, gaps proposed to be filled, etc. will have to be invariably carried out as this will
give a clear picture of recruitment planning.

(iv) The utilization of reserves, especially the leave and training reserves is mostly shown, to be
‘NIL’ by cadre authorities. If that were really the case, it will have to be explained as to what happens
to the reserves already provided for and created, i.e. how they are being utilized. If leave and training
reserves, say, are in effect utilized to man regular duty posts, it could be because either the authorized
strength of the regular cadre is short of the needed size or the sanctioned strength does not match the
requirements of fee Service in full. In any case, suitable adjustments will have to be made in the
proposals for cadre review.

(v) The recruitment rules with latest amendments should invariably be enclosed to the proposal
papers as also the organisational and functional charts. The organisational charts should indicate the
current position as also the position expected to obtain if the proposals are approved by the Cadre
Review committee.

(vi) Seniority lists will have to be maintained accurately and upgraded as on’1“ January each year
showing the last batch covered for promotion to senior time scale, JAG, and SAG levels. This will
help in monitoring the implementation of the decisions concerning the last cadre review. ER sheets of
the officers should be maintained.

(vii) The financial implications of the proposal formulated by the Cadre Controlling Authority (in
respect of the cadre under its control) should be accurately worked out. This must be done based on
the difference in cadre size resulting from the proposals and not the presumption of cadre officers

(already working in different grades) securing promotion as a result of the review and thus being

24
 placed in a higher scale. The latter course does not always give a correct picture of the exact financial
implications of the cadre review proposal. The impact of NFSG and NFU (wherever applicable)
should also be worked out.

(viii) Orders sanctioning creation of new posts should invariably be endorsed to the Department of
Personnel & Training (Cadre Review Division). Besides, the cadre should prepare a calendar for the
DPC and the same should sent along with the six-monthly implementation report. DPC should be held
in time and the same should be monitored strictly. The implementation report of the last cadre review

should also be provided to the Cadre Review Division

25
 Annexure-lIl to the O.M. No. I-11011/16/2022-CRD dated 30.09.2022

Form:1-A

PERFORMA FOR CADRE STRENGTH REVIEW

Cadre Structure : No. of posts sanctioned as on 1*t January 1990 — 1% January of the Current Year.

A. REGULAR DUTY POSTS

S. 1990 2000 2010 2020 No. of posts sanctioned as on first January of
No. the two previous years and the current year
Current Year

before | year

TOTAL
| 14 |

SS a Tempy.
a

6. S.T.S.

7. JTS.
1|Page
 e8eq[z

“payeoipul Ayeajo aq Aew sity eviesed Bulures| 10 s}sod Ajnq sejnBay jo yed si evleses siguoneqoid auaung (2)
“BIPED Bu} JO apes6 Jsemo] Su} Ul Aq ||IM SaAISSOY ‘AlJEWON “Aed Jo ajeos
@UO UBY} JOW Ul SI BAIasal e aioyM Ajayesedes umoys aq AeW sejeds JUSIOYIP U! s}sod Jo JequuNu ‘(se~lasey) .g, Ul (q)

“sueak 321U} JO Yokes JO) s}eyoelq

ul peyeoipul aq Aew uolIsod U! SY@OLYO Jo JaqUUNU JeN}oe Jo seinBy ‘(s}sog Ajnq JejnBsy) Z|} 0} g suLUN]OO Ul ‘Vy, Uy (e)

HLONAYLS SYCVS GSSIMOHLNV ‘a
(d) leIOL

uojejndsq ‘vy

area] ‘€

Bululel] *Z

siauoneqoid ‘}

S

v €

Jea, Juan

0c0e O10e

o00z

Aienuef ,.} Uo se “on

uondiioseq

SSAUSS3AY
 FORM : 1-B

STAFFING OF CADRE POSTS AS ON 187 JANUARY OF CURRENT YEAR

Grade

POSTS OUTSIDE THE CADRE (DEPARTMENT-WISE) HAVING SIMILAR FUNCTIONS AS CADRE POSTS

No. of No. of | No. No. filled by No. filled by departmental candidates on ad hoc Remarks
Posts - | Posts | filled | deputationists basis for periods of
Sanctioned | filled by as per Up to 1 1-3 3-5 5-10 | Over | Total
cadre recruitment year 10
officers rules years
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
FORM :1-C

SI. No. | Grade No. of posts outside cadre existing for periods (in years) of No. of
(Scale posts
of Pay) held by
cadre
officers
Up to 2 2-5 Over5 | Total | Permanent! Temporary
years years |
1 2 3 4 5 6 | 7 8 9 |

Brief reasons for keeping such posts outside cadre (to be indicated on a separate sheet).

3|Page

 asedly

ajeos ut

g]eoS IS

afeog Sur
apeig AeUIPIO
PEI UOIDE]eS

ovr

Tey; JeybiY S}S0q

g v € Z L
(poujew Ayioads) uojowoid
Jeujo Auy jeyusupedag poaig
speway JUSWUPINIDY JO poujsy| apel

Weak jualin jo Alenuer ,,) UO Se UORISOg) JUSUJINIOSY JO PO4JOIy

V-ll: WeOd
 FORM : ll-B

Departmental Promotion

Grade and | Total no. of Direct Recruitment

Scale vacancies |

No. to be No. Difference | No. to be No. Difference | No. taken

filled by actually between filled in actually between by other

direct recruited Col. (3) through promoted Col. (6) method

recruitment and (4) promotion and (7) (specify)
_

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

5| Page

 ased|9

(Joys oyeuedes & uo Ayaliq pazeoipul eq Aew) yUsWBINIDe1 JopuN 10) Suosesy (q)

sjejoL

sueak ¢ ue} a0) (It!)
seek €-Z (1)
sieak z ody (1) ‘|

9 S v € (A L
ejonb uoljowoid ejonb
SISUIO lejueupedsg | JueuInioes joauiq
soiouece/, Ked
]e}0 SOIDUBDEA JO “ON Jo uoneing Jo ajeagjepein

(aeah juasins Jo Arenuer ,,, uo se uonisod) yUusUINIDEY apun (Vv)

oll: NYOF

 FORM : lll-A

MAINTENANCE NEEDS
Grade/Scale of | Cause of Wastage | Total No. of officers washed out during the preceding 4 years Remarks
pay from which and the current year
wasted out
20- 20- 20- 20- 20 (Current
Year)
4 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

vee ewewnwewnces (a) Retirement on Superannuation
(b) Resignation
(c) Other Reasons
peseeeee weve (€)
(b)
(c)

Note : The number of promotes may be mentioned in brackets under each item.

7|Page

 asedq|s

SJSO\YJO JO JOqUUNU |2}0} JO soiNBYy ay} ul Ajayesedas UMOYs oq ALU SIBOJO PS]OWOLd

1e}01
02
02
0g
0c
02
8 Z | 9 | G v £ c L
920g “It | a[B9g “IS | Over oS vs s|aA9| Jay61H
LOL Avenuef }siy 210}8q Jo uo Bulyenuuesodns siaoisjo Jo ‘oN YVaA

SYVAA $ LX3N SHL YSAO INSWSeILaY GALVdIOLLNV

ill : INNOS
 FORM :IV-—A

Year (Last No. of officers on leave for periods (in days) of Total No. No. of Remarks
5 years) of officers | substitutes
Less than 45-60 60-90 90-120 120 & in leave posted
45 above
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
20-
20-
20-
FORM : IV-B
Year (Last 5 No. of officers deputed for training for period (in days) of No. of Remark
years) substitutes
| Up to 45 46-90 91-180 Above 180 Total | posts
1 | 2 3 4 5 6 | 7

9|Page

 a8ed| Or

Z 9 G | v € [A L
"02 "02 | “02 ~~ 02 ~~ 0Z
Ked
jo a}e29s YM UOHeIndeq
syleway sieok Bulpsceid g au} jo Arenuer ys UO UOHeINdaq UO SIdOYYO Jo “ON

UO SJBD1JJO BU} JO apeIs|

NOILVLNdsG

S-Al : WHOA

 Lenath of Service of officers in each grade as on 1%t Janua

FORM : V-A

of current year

Grades Total No. of officers who have put in a total service (in years) of Total
Less than 8-9 10-14 15-19 20-24 25-29 30 and
5 above
1 2 3 4 5 6 | 7 8 9

1
2
3
4
5
6

11|Page
 es8ed| zt

ale9S aul] JOIUaS
ovr

SPesd UoNOs|\E9g

SVS
OVH
+9DVH
xedy
v € iA L
winuIxeyy WUNLUIUTIAY

(L 109 ul peyeoipul) apei6

SyeUeY |

SU} 0} UOT}OUWIOId |JOJaq Ul jnd (sueBeX Ul) BoIAIaS [B10]

(Aed jo aje9S) apes

[syinisey

Weld JO sed Ul paliiy og Ae) (EO WSN Jo ATenuef ,., UO Se UOHISOd) Spuiey UOHouloid jSed OSIM opeis

GA: INNOA
 FORM : V-C

AGE - COMPOSITION AS ON 187 JANUARY OF CURRENT YEAR

Age Group
(years)

No. of officers in the grade of

Remarks

Higher levels SAG SG JAG Senior
Time Scale

Junior
Time Scale

Upto 26
26 to 30
30 to 35
35 to 40
40 to 45
45 to 50

Above 50

Number of promote officers may be indicated in brackets.

13 | Page
 eBed| vt

(SIl2}9P @AID) SeOYJO JEYIO | sBuIyeyepuN Joes o1GNg

"BOSS JeNUED ay] episino WSS JeNUSD ol) IY (a129g JolUag) Keg Jo ajeog

YVaA LNAYYNSD FHL JO ANVANVE ish NO
SV SAO8V ONV F1V9S SNIL YOINSS SHL NI S1SOd SNGV9-Xa ONIAdNDDO SY391g40 FYCVO 40 YASHINN

G-A: INYO4

 FORM: VIA

GROWTH NEEDS OVER THE NEXT 5 YEARS

Item Total requirements of personnel over the next 5 (five) years due to growth
1st year 24 year 3” year 4 year 5% year Total
4 2 3 4 5 6 7

a) Normal growth in quantum of work.

b) New scheme (Specify each)
1.
2.
3.

c) Policy induced changes
1. Structural/Organizational

2. Personne!

3. Administrative/Procedural Reforms

15|Page

 aged or

‘919 ‘uoepei6dn wo. Bunjnsad sjsod jo Jequinu pue epes6 yore ul sjsod Meu Jo Jaquunu Ajayeredas ayeolpuy : JON

Z 9 S v | € é L
jejo |. Je WG Jeok wy Jee n€ | LEA puZ IEA yo,
Buunp pasinbal s}sod jo ‘on Ked jo aje99 sepeisy

SSS = Ce Oe

SUVA S$ LXAN YAAO SG33SN HLMOND JO dnvVadd ASIMSaqVeD

GIA : WHOS
 FORM: VII-A

PROJECTED REQUREMENTS OF PERSONNEL FOR THE NEXT 5 YEARS

Item

Additional requirements over the next 5 (five) years

18 year 2d year 3" year 4 year 5" year

Total

Replacement needs
a) Normal retirements
b) Other causes of wastages
Sub total ......... ee
Growth needs
Gap on account of post under recruitment
Increase in reserves
a) Leave reserve
b) Training reserve
c) Deputation reserve
Sub total ...............6000e

17|Page

 23ed| gt

SHeWaY

Wy dnois)

0} pejuiodde eq

0} pesodoid suao1yo
.G, Anois jo “oN

OSdN 9} peylyou
9q 0} pesodoid
SOIDULDEA JO "ON

ez

Jeo)

SdUVSA S LXAN YOd NV 1d LNSWLINYOSY

&llA = WYOd

 FORM : VIII

SUMMARY STATEMENT OF EXISTING AND PROPOSED STRUCTURE OF THE SERVICE/CADRE

Grade

Scale of Pay

Sanctioned Strength as on
1st January as on 1*
January of current year

Proposed strength as on 1%
January of the year after
next year

4

(A) Regular Duty Posts
Posts higher than SAG

JAG

Selection Grade
Ordinary Grade

Time Scale

Sr. Scale
Jr. Scale

TOTAL ? ....1.s000 sev ecemeeonanne

(B) RESERVES

1. Probationer’s reserve

2. Training reserve
3. Leave reserve
4. Deputation reserve

TOTAL : ........ naa aan eRaR ans
GRAND TOTAL : .........005 oc

 ased|oz

‘(payoeye oq

Aeus jst] AoIUas Jo Adoo Y) ‘syoadsosd uonOWold einjn) BuneUse JOJ SISEG SY} WUOJ Pinoys jsIj AjWOIUas Jse}e] OU, : S]ON

xedy

+DVH

SVH

OVS

uolpel|es Ovr
Meuipio Over
QBS aul] JOlUaS

S v € [4

WINWIxel| WINWUIUIYY winwixey Wwnwuiuly

MAINDY Spey Jay MAIADY Bpey aojeg

L109 Ul psyeolpul epes6 ay} 0} UoHOWWOJd alojeq apes6 Jomo] By} UI (SIeeA) BoIAIAS Jo Y]BUaT

|

Ked jo ajeagapeig

XI: INYOd

LSVd HLIM GauVdiNOD CaL53rO0ud) SLOSdSO¥d NOILOWONd SSIM-adved

 FORM : IX-A

ing batch-wise and grade-wise break-up of number of officers holding Cadre, Ex-cadre posts etc.
as on 1%t January of current years

Statement show

Year of * | Number of | Number of Total JTS STS JAG SAG Higher
Allotment Direct Promotee Post
Recruits Officers
1 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 6 7 8 9

e oldest serving direct recruit or, if the service is newly constituted and the

* Commencing from the year of allotment of th
senior most officer of the cadre is a promotee, from the years of allotment of such promotee.

21| Page

 info

Annexure-IIl to the O.M. No. I-11011/16/2022-CRD dated 30.09.2022

Model Cadre Review Proposal

rmation required for examination of the Cadre Review proposal:
. Whether representatives of the service association(s) consulted.
_ Whether the proposal has been referred to Department of Personnel and

Training with the due approval of the Integrated Finance Division and the

" Minister in charge.
A cettificate to the effect that no court case is pending which will have

pearing on the proposed cadre review.

_ Name of the contact officer(s) who can furnish additional information, if

needed.

. Acopy of recruitment rules with latest amendments.
‘A copy of Civil list/seniority list.
. Whether an attempt has been made in the proposal to encadre all the

posts which have similar functions and responsibilities.

, Any recommendation of Pay Commission or Parliamentary Committees or

Audit Report or any other Expert Group on the Service may also be

included.
As per instruction issued by the Department of Expenditure, the cadre
review proposal should not result in any increase in the number of posts.

Information as per performa prescribed in the Monograph.
 Model Cadre Review Proposal .
Capy No.

SECRET
No. 11011/3/2013-( )
Government of India
Ministry of Planetary Affairs

New Delhi, Dated the August, 2014

NOTE FOR THE COMMITTEE OF SECRETARIES
a EL CUMIN TEE OF SECRETARIES

Subject: Cadre Review of the “Solar Family Exploration Service” under the

1.2

Ministry of Planetary Affairs.

Introduction & Background

The proposal under consideration is for review of cadre of the Solar Family
Exploration Service’, which is an Organised Group ‘A’ Service under the Ministry
of Planetary Affairs. The, officers of the Service are responsible for managing the
material supply chains to provided procurement and logistics support for the solar
missions of the Govt. of India. The Service was constituted in the year
Recruitment Rules of the Service were framed in the year and
were amended on 19.02.1987, The First Cadre Review of the Service was
, the third in 2006 and

done in the year , the second in the year

this is the Cadre Review of the Service.

Cadre Strength of the Service, at the time of Inception WAS ---------—-— and the
present sanctioned strength of the Service is---~--------.-- .The major changes in
the strength undergone in the service since inception are as under:
 (As on 1* Jan.)

Review

Review

Any other major
increase

Year

Year

Grade | Inception [71* al oe Cadre

Year

Apex

HAG+

HAG

SAG

JAG

STS

JTS

{ Total

1.3 Functions & Responsibilities of the Service.

(This should include the work allocation of ‘the service)

Apart from postings in the main Ministry, i.e., the M/o Planetary Affairs, the
officers of the Solar Family Exploration Service are also posted in its field
formations and some other important Ministries/Departments like PMO, Ministry
of Science & Technology and organizations like ISRO, etc. The seniormost post

in the service is

at the Apex level in the Ministry of Planetary Affairs.

The distribution of posts in different offices (grade wise) is as follows :
Table 1

[ HAG

SAG | JAG

JTS _| Total

Ministry
Headquarters/Board

Apex

STS
+

D/O Moon Mission

D/o Mars Mission

D/o Venus Mission

D/o Saturn Mission

PMO

ISRO

Lt

Other Ministries

. Field offices

Total

beep tt tt |

 1.5 The field offices are situated at Bangaluru, Hyderabad, Mumbai, Chenna,,,
Kolkata......... These offices are-headed by the we, , Which is an _ level post.
He reports to the oo... , an .....level officer in the Ministry of Planetary Affairs.
The cadre post of the service in PMO, ISRO and other Ministries are at SAG/JAG level
The present Organizational Structure in the Ministry is as follows :-

The present Organizational Structure in the Field formation) is as follows:-

1.6 The .Direct recruitment to the service is done at JTS level through Civil Services
Examination/Engineering Services Examination conducted by the Union Public Service
Commission and the minimum qualification for the service is graduate/graduate in
Engineering. The ratio prescribed for direct recruitment to promotion is 1:1.

1.7 The feeder.grades comprises of ............ 4 dewey and the cadre strength of the
feeder grades is . The details of the strength in each of the feeder grades are as

under:

2 Functional justification for Cadre Review as given by the Department : The
officers of the service are playing a very important role to achieve the goals outlined
for development of Solar Mission of the Govt. of India. In last five years i.e, after the
last cadre review there are major changes undergone in the workload and mandate
of the organization.

. a The main reason leading to the decision of cadre review along with
supporting information.
b. Change in the mandate of the organization and role of the service in

future.
 c. Business process reengineering redistribution of posts and
responsibilities.

d. Increase in volume of work.

@, Impact of computerisation and outsourcing of certain works hitherto being
undertaken in the Department,

f. Impact of creation of public sector units for work which were ‘originally
being performed by this service

2.1 Justification for increase/decrease in posts at different levels.
The Cadre Review proposal is aimed to meet the functional requirement as weil as
career expectations of the officers of the Service. and keeping in view the same, it is
proposed to revise the cadre strength in various grades keeping the overall cadre
strength intact. The details are as under:

(i)Apex Level. At present there is no post at this level It is prposed to
create/upgrade _ posts at this level to look after the work of ___( functional
justification).In case the proposal is accepted officers of the __batch will be
covered.

(ii) HAG + Level

(ili) HAG Level —

(iv)SAG Level

(v) JAG/NFSG

(vi)STS Level

(vii)JTS Level

(viii) Reserve

(The Batches to be covered in each grade after the proposed cadre review
should also be indicated.)
 2.2 Changes in the Organizational Structure after the proposed Cadre Review.

Table 2
Existing

Apex

JTS
|

Total

Ministry
Headquarters/Board

HAG [SAG t [STs

D/O Moon Mission

Dio Mars Mission

|

D/o Venus Mission

:

|

| Dio Saturn Mission
PMO

|

ISRO

Other Ministries

Field offices

| Total

1

Table 3
Proposed

Ministry
Headquarters/Board
D/O Moon Mission
D/o Mars Mission

.D/o Venus Mission

nt

TAG

STS

JTS

Total

D/o Saturn Mission

[SRO

[ :

Other Ministries
| Field offices

Total

 Table 4— Structure of cadre proposed by the Ministry of Planetary Affairs.

SI. Grade Existing ) Proposed | % of SDP

No. Strength | Strength [Normative _| Existing | Proposed
() | Apex “TS _

(il) HAG+

(iy) | HAG

(iv) SAG 17

| JAGINESG 50

(vi) STS 30

3 Financial implications/Financial Neutrality

The cadre restructuring, as proposed above, would entail an‘ additional
expenditure of around Rs. per annum. The calculation sheet is annexed.
(While calculating Financial Implication, the NFSG and NFU may also be taken
into account. As far as possible, ‘Nil’ financial implications may be shown, If

some posts are required to be created, which results in financial implications, the
same may be neutralized by showing matching savings by curtailing a few posts
from some other grade. Hence, as far as possible budget neutrality may be

shown).

4 Recruitment Planning
 The cadre review proposal should ensure that planned recruitment should by
done by the Department taking into account maintenance and growth needs of

the cadre and promotional prospects for the holders of the cadre posts,

4.1 Year wise recruitment position:

Year of

Number = of | Number of [Number of Number of
Recruitment | Vacancies for persons vacancies to | officers
Direct actually — be filled by actually
Recruitment | appointed | promotion _| promoted
|
i oF F — —
Le LL I

4.2Year wise recruitment planning: The detailed recruitment planning for the
next five years may be shown,

| Year

Direct Recruitment to be
; . romotion

Number of Vacancies for] Number of vacancies
filled by

 5 Vacancy position: The details of incumbency position are as under:

(As on 1% Jan.)

Grade | Authorized Actual Strength (No. of officers holding) Last
Sanctioned | Cadre | Ex- — | Deputation/Leave/Training | Total | Promoted
strength post cadre Officer's

osts Batch

Apex.

HAG+

(In case of vacancy, the steps to mitigate the vacancy level may also be indicated)

6 Batch wise strength

Batch (Year)

Direct Recruits | Promotee

(As on 1 Jan.)

Total

 7 Proposal for approval :
Approval of Committee of Secretaries is solicited for the cadre review proposal of
the Solar Family Exploration Service as summarised below:

The following changes in the Cadre structure :

i,  Creation/abolition of ___ posts at HAG Level

i. Increase/decrease of ___ posts at SAG Level

iil. | Reduction/enhancement of___- posts at JAG Level

iv. Reduction/enhancement of _____ Posts at STS Level and
v.  Reduction/enhancement of ___ posts at JTS Level

The recommendation made above can be summarized as below :

Proposed Strength

SDP
(vi)

(vii) | Reserve
Total Strength

This has the approval of Integrated Finance Division and Minister Incharge.

(Signature)

10
 Annexure-IlV to the O.M. No. I-11011/16/2022-CRD dated 30.09.2022

Services/cadres required to be reviewed through the Cadre Review Committee
(para 4.6)

(Note: This list is only for the purpose of cadre review)

S. No. Name of the Service (Ministry Wise)

Ministry of External Affairs

1. Indian Foreign Service

Ministry of Finance

Indian Revenue Service (C&IT)

Indian Revenue Service

Indian Economic Service

Indian Audit & Accounts Service

Indian Civil Accounts Service

Indian Cost Accounts Service

Ministry of Railways

8. Indian Railway Management Service

e Indian Railways Traffic Service

Indian Railways Accounts Service

Indian Railways Personnel Service

Indian Railways Service of Engineers

Indian Railways Service of Signal Engineers

Indian Railways Service of Mechanical Engineers

Indian Railways Service of Electrical Engineers
e indian Railways Stores Service

: Indian Railway Protection Force Service

10. Indian Railways Health Service

NYO] B/N

Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
11. Indian Information Service :
Ministry of Communications
12. Indian P&T Accounts and Finance Service
13. Indian Postal Service
14. Indian Telecommunications Service
15. Indian Radio Regulatory Service
: Ministry of Defence
16. Indian Defence Accounts Service
17. Indian Defence Estates Service
18. Indian Defence Service of Engineers
19. Indian Naval Armament Service
20. Border Roads Engineering Service
21. Indian Naval Material Management Service
22. Defence Research and Development Service
23. Defence Aeronautical Quality Assurance Service
24. Defence Quality Assurance Service
Ministry of Commerce
25. Indian Trade Service
26. Indian Petroleum & Explosives Safety Service
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways
27. Central Engineering Service (Roads)

Ministry of Jalshakti
28. Central Water Engineering Service

 Ministry of Urban Development
29. Central Engineering Service (CPWD)
30. Central Electrical & Mechanical Engineering Service (CPWD)
31. Central Architect Service (CPWD)
Ministry of Power
32. Central Power Engineering Service
Ministry of Skili Development
33. Indian Skill Development Service
Ministry of Health
34. Central Health Service
Ministry of Law & Justice
35. Indian Legal Service
Ministry of Mines
36. Central Geological Service Group ‘A’
37. Geological Survey of India Chemical Service Group ‘A’
38. Geological Survey of India Geophysical Service Group ‘A’
39. Geological Survey of India Engineering Service Group ‘A’
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation
40. Indian Statistical Service
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
41. [Indian Corporate Law Service
Ministry of Home Affairs
| 42. Indo Tibetan Border Police (General Duty Cadre Group ‘A’)
43. Central Industrial Security Force (General Duty Cadre Group ‘A’)
44. Border Security Force (General Duty Cadre Group ‘A’)
45. | Central Reserve Police Force (General Duty Cadre Group ‘A’) |
46. Sashastra Seema Bal (Combatised General Duty Cadre Group ‘A’)
47. Medical cadre of CRPF
48. Medical cadre of ITBP
49. Medical cadre of BSF
50. Medical cadre of SSB
Mo Science & Technology
51. Survey of India Group ‘A’ Service
Ministry of Labour & Employment
52. Central Labour Service |
In the following Services (which are declared dying or posts have been
transferred to other organisations/PSUs or on deemed deputation in PSUs),
requirement of cadre review may be decided on case-to-case basis)
53. Indian Ordnance Factories Service
54. Indian Ordnance Factory Health Service
55. Indian Supply Service
56. Indian Inspection Service
57. Indian Broadcasting (Programme) Service
58. Indian Broadcasting (Engineering) Service
59. P&T Building Works Service
60. Group ‘A’ posts of Scientists in Ministry of Earth Science (earlier Indian
Meteorological Service)

 Annexure-V to the O.M. No. 1-11011/16/2022-CRD dated 30.09.2022

DATA FORMAT FOR CADRE STRENGTH, STRUCTURAL RATION AND THRESHOLD ANALYSIS FOR CENTRAL GROUP ‘a’ SERVICES AS ON 1ST JANUARY/1ST JULY

CADRE CONTROLLING AUTHORITY :

separately)

batch/totai no. of officers in the
batch

NAME OF THE SERVICE :
ro 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Pay Matrix as per 7th CPC (pre-revised pay scales have Authorised Sanctioned Officers in Officers on Total (Column| Last promoted Officer's batch (i.e | Year of Last Remarks#
been indicated within brackets) Strength of Cadre (Ex- position on deputation/ |3+ Column 4)| Year of UPSC Exam's final result) a Cadre
Cadre Posts to be shown| cadre posts leave/ training nd Serial No. of the officer in the Review*

Apex Scale

[Level -17 {Rs.80,000(Fixed)}

Higher Administrative Grade (HAG)+

Level-16 (Rs.75,000 - 80,000}

L

Higher Administrative Grade (HAG)

Level-15 (Rs.67,000 -79,000)

Senior Administrative Grade (SAG)

14 {Rs.37,400-67,000 + G.P.10,000 (Pay Band4}}
Junior Administrative Grade (JAG)
Level-13 A {Rs.37,400-67,000 + G.P.8,900 (Pay Band 4}
Level-13 {Rs.37,400-67,000 + G.P.8,700 (Pay Band 4)}
-12 {Rs.15,600-39,100 + G.P.7,600 (Pay Band3)}
Senior Time Scale (STS)
Level-11 {Rs.15,600-39,100 + G.P.6,600 (Pay Band 3)}

Jenior Time Scale (JTS)

Level-10 {Rs.15,600-39,100 + G.P.5,400 (Pay Band 3)}

Rserve (JTS) $

—

[ie Leave Reserve
. Training Reserve

—|—

i

3. Deputaion Reserve
4, Probation Reserve

I

$ whether separate provisions of each of the reserves exists in the cadre or it is combined or inclusive with JTS.

i

* It is to be confirmed whether Cadre Review was undertaken in compliance of established cadre review procedure issued by DoPT.

indicating the authority which approved such proposal and whether DoPT was consulted for the same.

# A separate sheet containing the cadre structure approved during the last cadre review must be provided.
# If creation of posts has taken separately through other than the cadre reveiw procedure established by DoPT, details of last of such action, along with cadre struture after such approval be provided

# Last amendment in Service Rules/Recruitment Rules and whether the same contain the decision of last cadre review.

 