No. 2001 1/4/92-AlS-II
Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, P.G. & Pensions
Department of Personnel & Training

New Delhi, dated 28" March, 2000.

To

The Chief Secretaries of all the State Governments
and Union Territories.

Subject: Indian Administrative Service — promotion to various grades — guidelines
regarding.

Sir,

| am directed to say that Central Government has issued detailed
guidelines for functioning of Departmental Promotion Committees (DPCs) and for
promotion of members of the Indian Administrative Service to the Senior Scale
and Supertime Scale from time to time. These instructions, inter alia, lay down
guidelines for determining the eligible officers’ suitability for different grades in
the service, crucial dates of promotion in these grades, composition and working
of the DPCs, procedures to be adopted in cases of officers against whom
disciplinary/court proceedings are pending or whose conduct is under
investigation etc.

2. In view of the multiplicity of these instructions, it has been decided to
consolidate the same at one place and also modify them to take care of the
changes which have since taken place in the — structure of the Service.
Accordingly, the relevant instructions for the Indian Administrative Service as
contained in Annexures | and Il are being issued for guidance of all concerned.
The relevant rules/instructions have been indicated as footnotes.

3. It is requested that in the interest of uniformity and objectivity, these
instructions may be followed strictly, while granting promotion to the members of
the Indian Administrative Service in different grades. Members of the DPCs may
also be suitably briefed on these instructions at the time their meetings are held.
Should any deviation from any of these guidelines is required to be made in
exceptional circumstances, prior approval of the Central Government must be
sought.

Yours faithfully
(A.K. Sarkar)
Director

Copies forwarded to all Ministries and
Departments of the Government of India.

Separate copies with 10 spare copies each to:-

1. MHA, Police Division, with the request that they may consider beinging
suitable changes in the Promotion Guidelines issued in respect of the
Indian Police Service, vide their letter No.45020/11/97-IPS.II dated
15.1.99.

2. MHA, UTS
 3. Ministry of Environment & Forests, Forests Division, with the request that
similar instructions may e considered for issue in respect of the Indian
Forest Service, early.

(A.K. Sarkar)
Director
 ANNEXURE - I

PRINCIPLES REGARDING PROMOTION OF MEMBERS OF THE
INDIAN ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE AND COMPOSITION OF
DEPARTMENTAL PROMOTION COMMITTEES

L. APPOINTMENT TO SENIOR TIME SCALE

An officer is eligible for appointment to the Senior Time Scale on
completion of 4 years’ service, subject to the provisions of rule 6A of the
IAS (Rectt.) Rules, 1954'. A Committee consisting of the Chief Secretary
and two officers of atleast Supertime Scale level of the State Government
concerned shall evaluate the performance of the eligible officers for deciding
their suitability for promotion to posts in the Senior Time Scale~. Subject to
availability of posts, this scale can be allowed from or after 1“ January
during the relevant year in which officers become eligible for this scale®.

II. APPOINTMENT TO THE JUNIOR ADMINISTRATIVE GRADE

An officer is eligible for appointment in the Junior Administrative
Grade on completing 9 years of service’. This grade is non-functional and
shall be admissible without any screening, as a matter of course, to all the
officers of the Senior Time Scale from Ist January of the relevant year" ,
except in cases where any disciplinary/criminal proceedings are pending
against the officer.

IN. APPOINTMENT TO THE SELECTION GRADE

An officer of the Junior Administrative Grade shall be eligible for
appointment to the Selection Grade on completion of 13 years of service as
per the proviso to rule 3(2A) of the IAS (Pay) Rules, 1954. A Committee
consisting of the Chief Secretary and two officers of the concerned State
Government, in the Supertime Scale or above, shall screen the eligible
members of the Service for promotion in this grade’. This grade will be
available from or after 1" January of the relevant year subject to availability
of vacancies in this grade’ .

1.Rule 3, IAS (Pay) Rules, 1975.

2.DP&T’s Letter No. 11030/20/75-AIS(ID),dt. 27.12.75
3.DP&T’s Letter No. 11030/15/97-AIS(II),dt. 15.10.97
4.DP&T’s Letter No. 11030/22/91-AIS(ID),dt. 16.3.93
 IV. PROMOTION IN THE SUPERTIME SCALE

The members of the Service who are working in the Selection Grade
and have completed 16 years of service’ shall be eligible for appointment in
the Supertime Scale at any time during the year of their eligibility, subject to
availability of vacancies in this grade. The Screening Committee to
consider officers for promotion in this scale would consist of the Chief
Secretary as Chairman and 2 officers working in the grade of Principal
Secretary within the State Government concerned, as members.

If, however, there is only one officer working in the grade of Principal
Secretary to the Government available in the cadre, the senior-most
Supertime Scale officer available in the cadre may be included in the in the
Committee.

V. PROMOTION IN THE FIRST ABOVE SUPERTIME SCALE i.e
PRINCIPAL SECRETARY TO THE STATE GOVERNMENT.

The zone of consideration for promotion in this grade may consist of
the Supertime Scale level officers who have completed 25 years’ service.
Promotion of officers thus cleared could be made at any time during the
relevant year, provided vacancies in this grade are available. The Screening
Committee to consider officers for promotion in this scale will consist of
the Chief Secretary as Chairman and one senior-most officer each working
in the grades of Chief Secretary to the Government and Principal Secretary
to the Govt. respectively in the cadre, as members. If an officer of the grade
of Principal Secretary to the Government is not available in the cadre, the
senior-most officer of the same level of the cadre working in the
government of India may be taken as a member.

VI. PROMOTION IN THE GRADE OF CHIEF SECRETARY

The zone of consideration for promotion in this grade would consist
of all the members of the Service who have completed 30 years of service.
Appointment in this grade would be made from amongst the officers thus
cleared, at any time during the relevant year and subject to the provisions
of rule 9(7) of the I.A.S. (Pay) Rules, 1954. The Screening Committee for
this purpose shall consist of the Chief Secretary concerned, one officer
working in this grade in the cadre and another officer of the cadre serving
in Government of India in the same grade.

RERKKK
 ANNEXURE II

GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR PROMOTION ETC. AND
FUNCTIONING OF SCREENING COMMITTEES

1. FUNCTIONS OF SCREENING COMMITTEES

It should be ensured while making promotions that suitability of
candidates for promotion is considered in an objective and impartial manner.
For this purpose, Screening Committees ( hereafter referred to as Committees)
as mentioned in Annexure I should be formed for different grades whenever
an occasion arises for making promotions/confirmations etc. The Committees
so constituted shall adjudge the suitability of officers for:-

(a) Promotions in various grades, including ad-hoc promotions in
cases where disciplinary proceedings/criminal prosecutions are
prolonged;

(b)Confirmation; and

(c)Assessment of the work and conduct of probationers for the

purpose of determining the suitability for retention in
service or their discharge from service or extending their
probation.

The Committee shall also undertake the three-monthly review
cases which have been placed in the Sealed Cover, as prescribed in para 19
supra.

2. FREQUENCY AT WHICH COMMITTEES SHOULD MEET

Meetings of the Committees should be convened at regular
intervals to draw panels for filling up vacancies arising during the course of a
year. For this purpose, it is essential for the concerned State Government to
initiate action to fill up the existing as well as anticipated vacancies well in
advance of the expiry of the previous panel by collecting relevant documents like
ACRs, integrity certificates, seniority list etc. for placing before the Committees.
Meetings of the Committees may be convened every year on a predetermined
date e.g. Ist of May or June. All the cadres should lay down a time schedule for
holding the Committee meetings and the Secretary-in-charge of the Personnel
Department of the State Government shall ensure that they are held regularly.
Holding of these meetings should not be delayed or postponed on one or the
other administrative ground or on the ground that the necessary material for
placement before the Committees is not

SDP&T’s OM No.2201 1/5/86-Estt.(d), dt. 10.4.89
 ready. The requirement of convening regular meetings of the Committees can
be dispensed with only after a certificate has been issued by the Secretary-in-
charge of the Personnel Deptt. to the effect that there are no vacancies to be
filled by promotion or no officers are due for promotion/confirmation during the
year in question.

3. DETERMINATION OF VACANCIES

It is essential that the number of vacancies in respect of which a
panel is to be prepared should be estimated as accurately as possible. For this
purpose, the vacancies to be taken into account should be the clear vacancies
arising in a grade due to death, retirement, resignation, promotions and
deputation. As regards vacancies arising due to deputation, only those cases of deputation for
periods exceeding one year Should be taken into account, taking due note of the number
of deputationists likely to return to the cadre. Purely short term vacancies
arising as a result of the officers proceeding on leave, training or on deputation
for a short-term period or as a result of overutifisation of the sanctioned State Deputation
Reserve not approved by the Central Government, should not be taken into account for the
purpose of preparation of a panel. In cases where there has been delay in
holding the Committee meetings for a year or more, vacancies should be
indicated year-wise separately, by also including the names of officers in the
zone of consideration who would have been eligible and available for
consideration had the meeting(s) of the DPC taken place in time6 but have since
retired or expired.

6DP&T’s OM No. 2201 1/4/98-Estt.(D), dt. 12.10.98.
 4. PAPERS TO BE PUT UP FOR CONSIDERATION BY COMMITTEES

4.1. The proposals should be completed and submitted to the
Committee well in time. No proposal for holding a Committee meeting should be
sent until and unless at least 90% of the up-to-date and complete ACRs are
available. Every effort should be made to keep the ACR dossiers up-to-date lest
this aspect is advanced as the reason for not holding the Committee meetings in
time. The officer referred in para 2 above would be responsible for monitoring
and the completion of the ACR dossiers as per the extant instruction in this
regard. In respect of cases relating to confirmation and assessment of the work
and conduct of probationers, he would ensure the timely submission of the
Assessment Reports etc.

4.2 The folder of ACRs/Assessment Reports should be checked to
verify whether the ACRs for individual years/relevant periods are available. If the
ACR for a particular year/particular period is not available and for valid/justifiable
reasons it cannot be made available, a certificate should be recorded to that
effect and placed in the folder.

4.3 The integrity certificate on the lines indicated below should be
furnished to the Committees constituted to consider cases for promotion or
confirmation :-

“The records of service of the following officers who
are to be considered for promotion/confirmation in
the grade have been carefully scrutinized and it is
certified that there is no doubt about their integrity.”

If there are names of persons in the list of eligible candidates, whose
integrity is suspect or has been held in doubt at one stage or the other, the fact
should specifically be recorded by the officer-in-charge of the Personnel
Department and brought to the notice of the Committee. The integrity certificate
would be withheld only in cases where one or the other contingencies as
indicated in para 11.1 supra has arisen. It should be ensured that the information
thus furnished is factually correct and complete in all respects. Cases where
incorrect information has been furnished should be investigated and suitable
action taken against the person responsible for it.

5. CONSIDERATION OF OFFICERS ON DEPUTATION ETC.

The names of officers who are on deputation for a period exceeding one
year shall also be included in the list submitted to the Committee for
consideration for promotion/confirmation in case they fulfil the prescribed
eligibility conditions. In cases where a certain number of years of service in the
lower grade is prescribed as a condition for becoming eligible for consideration
for promotion to the higher grade and/or for confirmation, the period of service
rendered by an officer on deputation should be treated as comparable service in
his cadre for the purposes of promotion as well as confirmation. This is subject
to the condition that the deputation is with the approval of the competent
authority and it is certified that but for deputation, the officer would have
continued to be in the relevant grade in his cadre. The same would apply in
cases of officers who are on leave/study leave duly sanctioned by the competent
authority or training under the various training schemes which are treated as
duty for all purposes.

6. PROCEDURE TO BE OBSERVED BY COMMITTEES
Each Committee should decide its own method and procedure for

objective assessment of the suitability of the candidates. While merit has to be
recognized and rewarded,. advancement in an officer's career should not be
 regarded as a matter of course. It should be earned by dint of hard work, good
conduct and result oriented performance as reflected in the annual confidential
report and based on strict and rigorous selection process. The misconception
about “Average” performance also requires to be cleared. While “Average” may
not be taken as adverse remark in respect of an officer, it cannot also be
regarded as complimentary to the officer. Such performance should be regarded
as routine and undistinguished. Nothing short of above-average and noteworthy
performance should entitle an officer to recognition and suitable rewards in terms
of career progression.

7. CONFIDENTIAL REPORTS

7.1. The Annual Confidential Reports are the basic inputs on the basis
of which assessment is to be made by each Committee. The evaluation of ACRs
should be fair, just and non-discriminatory. The Committee should consider
ACRs for equal number of years in respect of all officers falling within the zone of
consideration for assessing their suitability for promotion. Where one or more
ACRs have not been written for any reason, the Committee should consider the
available ACRs. If the Reviewing Authority or the Accepting Authority as the
case may be, has overruled the Reporting Officer or the Reviewing Authority
respectively, the remarks of the Accepting Authority should be taken as the final
remarks for the purposes of assessment. While making the assessment, the
Committee should not be guided merely by the overall grading that may be
recorded in the ACRs but should make its own assessment on the basis of the
overall entries made in the ACRs.

7.2 In the case of each officer, an overall grading should be given which
will be either “Fit” or “Unfit?. There will be no benchmark, for assessing suitability of
officers for promotions.

7.3. Before making the overall grading, the Committee should take into
account whether the officer has been awarded any major or minor penalty or
whether any displeasure of any higher authority has been conveyed to him.
Similarly, the Committee would also take note of the commendations received by
the officer during his service career. The Committee would also give due regard
to the remarks indicated against the column of integrity.

The list of candidates considered by the Committee and the overall
grading thus assigned to each candidate would form the basis for preparation of
the panel for promotion.

8. PREPARATION OF YEAR-WISE PANELS WHERE THE
COMMITTEE HAVE NOT MET FOR A NUMBER OF YEARS

8.1. Where for any reasons beyond control, the Committee has not met
in a year(s) even though vacancies arose during the year(s), the first Committee
that meets thereafter should follow the procedures indicated below :

(a) Determine the actual number of vacancies that arose in each of the
previous year(s) immediately preceding and the actual number of vacancies
proposed to be filled in the current year separately.

(b) Consider in respect of each of the years only those officers
including the officers who have retired/died in the meanwhile, who would be
within the zone of consideration with reference to the vacancies of each year
starting with the earliest year onwards.

(c) Prepare a panel by placing the panel of the earlier year above the
one for the next year and so on.
 8.2 Where a Committee has already met in a year and further
vacancies arise during the same year, the following procedure should be
followed :-

(a) For vacancies due to death, voluntary retirement, new creations
etc. belonging to the category which could not be foreseen at the time of placing
the facts and the matter before the Committee, another meeting of the
Committee should be held for drawing up a panel for the vacancies thus arising.
If for any reason, the Committee cannot meet for the second time, the procedure
of drawing up of yearwise panel, s indicated above, may be followed when it
meets next for preparing panels in respect of vacancies that arise in the
subsequent year.

(b) In cases of non-reporting of vacancies due to error or omission,
since the wrong whereby such an error artifically restricted the zone of
consideration cannot be undone, a Review DPC should be held taking into
consideration the total vacancies in the year.

(c) For the purpose of evaluating the merit of the officers while
preparing yearwise panels, the scrutiny of the record of the service of the officer
should be limited to the records that would have been available had the
Committee met at the appropriate time. However, if on the date of such meeting,
departmental proceedings against an officer are in progress and the sealed
cover procedure is to be followed, such procedure should be observed even if
departmental proceedings were not in existence in the year to which the vacancy
related. The officers name should be kept in the sealed cover till the
proceedings are finalized.

(d) | While promotions will be made in the order of the consolidated
panel, such promotions will have only prospective effect if it is in functional
grade, involving higher duties and responsibilities, even in cases where the
vacancies relate to earlier years. In cases of promotions in non-functional
grades, not involving higher duties and responsibilities, promotions may be
allowed from the due dates retrospectively.

9. CONFIRMATION

In the cases of confirmation, which is now a one-time affair during one’s
entire service, the Committee should not determine the relative merit of officers
but it should assess the officers as “Fit” or “Not Yet Fit” for confirmation in their
turn on the basis of their performances as assessed with reference to their
records of service. In case the Committee finds a probationer ‘Not Yet Fit’, it
shall record reasons for the same.

10. PROBATION

In the case of probation, the Committee should not determine the relative
grading of officers but only decide whether they should be declared to have
completed the probation satisfactorily within the meaning of the IAS (Probation)
Rules, 1954. If the performance of any probationer is not satisfactory, the
Committee may advice whether the period of probation should be extended or
whether he should be discharged from service, within the meaning of these
Rules.

11. . PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN RESPECT OF OFFICERS
AGAINST WHOM DISCIPLINARY/COURT PROCEEDINGS ARE
PENDING OR WHOSE CONDUCT IS UNDER INVESTIGATION

11.1 At the time of consideration of the cases of officers for promotion,
details of such officers in the zone of consideration falling under the following
categories should be specifically brought to the notice of the concerned
Screening Committees:-
 10

(a) Officers under suspension; (b) Officers in respect of whom a chargesheet has
been issued and disciplinary proceedings are pending ; (c) Officers in respect of
whom prosecution for criminal charge is pending.

11.2 The Screening Committee shall assess the suitability of the officers
coming within the purview of the circumstances mentioned above, alongwith
other eligible candidates, without taking into consideration the disciplinary
case/criminal prosecution which is pending. The assessment of the Committee
including “Unfit for Promotion” and the grading awarded by it will be kept in a
sealed cover. The cover will be superscribed “FINDINGS REGARDING THE
SUITABILITY FOR PROMOTION TO THE SCALE OF................ IN RESPECT
OF SHRI.......... eee NOT TO BE OPENED TILL THE TERMINATION OF
THE DISCIPLINARY CASE/CRIMINAL PROSECUTION AGAINST
SHR wereeeesneer cre ” The proceedings of the Committee need only contain the
note “ THE FINDINGS ARE CONTAINED IN THE ATTACHED SEALEAD
COVER”. The same procedure will be adopted by the subsequent Screening
Committees till the disciplinary case/criminal prosecution against the officer
concerned is concluded.

12. ADVERSE REMARKS

12.1 Where adverse remarks in the Confidential Report of the officer
concerned have not been communicated to him, this fact should be taken note
of by the Committee while assessing the suitability of the officer for
promotion/confirmation. In a case where a decision on the representation of an
officer against adverse remarks has not been taken or the time allowed for
submission of representation is not over, the Committee may defer the
consideration of the case until a decision on the representation is arrived at.

12.2 An officer whose increments have been withheld or who has
been reduced to a lower stage in the time-scale, cannot be considered on
that account to be ineligible for promotion as the specific penalty of
withholding promotion has not been imposed on him. The suitability of the
officer for promotion should be assessed by the Committee as and when
occasions arise. They will take into account the circumstances leading to the
imposition of the penalty and decide whether in the light of overall service
records of the officer and the fact of the imposition of the penalty, he should
be considered for promotion or not. Even where the Committee considers
that despite the penalty

the officer is suitable for promotion, the officer may be promoted only after
the currency of the penalty.

13. VALIDITY OF THE COMMITTEE PROCEEDNGS WHEN
ONE MEMBER IS ABSENT

In such cases and provided that the Chairman was not absent, the
proceedings of the Committee shall be legally followed and can be acted
upon. It should, however, be ensured that the member was duly invited but
he absented himself for one reason or the other and there was no deliberate
attempt to exclude him from the Committee’s deliberations and provided
further that the majority of the members constituting the Committee are
present in the meeting.

14. PROCESSING OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEES
 11

14.1 The recommendations of the Committee area advisory in
nature and should be duly placed before the State Government for approval.
There may, however, be occasions when the State Government may find it
necessary to disagree with the recommendations. In any case, however, the
decision to agree or disagree with the recommendations should be taken
within a period of 3 months from the date the Committee forwards its
recommendations.

14.2 Where the State Government proposes to disagree with the
recommendations of the Committee, it may refer the matter again to the
Committee for reconsideration of their earlier recommendations. If the
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations giving also the reasons in
support thereof, the State Government shall take a decision either to accept
or to vary the recommendations of the Committee, by giving reasons to be
recorded in writing, and such a decision shall be final.

15. VIGILANCE CLEARANCE WHILE IMPLEMENTING THE
COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS

A clearance from vigilance angle should be available before
making actual promotion or confirmation of officers approved by the
Committee to ensure that no disciplinary proceedings are pending against
the officer concerned.

16. ORDER IN WHICH PROMOTIONS TO BE MADE

The officers placed in the approved panels for promotion are to be
considered for appointment to higher grades in the order of their inter-se
position in the respective panels, except in cases where disciplinary/court
proceedings are pending against an officer. The procedure to be adopted in
cases of officers against whom disciplinary/court proceedings are pending
has been laid down in the succeeding paragraphs.

17. PROMOTION OF OFFICERS ON DEPUTATION

If a panel contains the name of an officer who is away from the cadre
and is on deputation in public interest for a period exceeding one year
including an officer who has gone on study leave/training, the officer shall
be eligible for his regaining the temporarily-lost promotion in the higher
grade on his return to the cadre. It has to be borne in mind that seniority of
members of India Administrative Service which is initially fixed, is not to
undergo any change throughout their career and early or late promotion of
an officer vis-a-vis other officer(s) in a particular grade is to have no impact
on their seniority. Therefore, such an officer need not be reconsidered by a
fresh Committee, if subsequently held, while he continues to be on
deputation/study leave/training. This would be irrespective of the fact
whether or not he has got the benefit of proforma promotion under the
“‘Next-Below Rule’.
 12

18. SEALED COVER CASES — ACTION AFTER
COMPLETION OF DISCIPLINARY/CRIMINAL PROSECUTION’

18.1 If the proceedings of the Committee for promotion contain
findings in a sealed cover, on conclusion of the disciplinary
case/criminal prosecution, the sealed cover or covers shall be
opened. In case the officer is completely exonerate, the due date of
his promotion will be determined with reference to the findings of the
Screening Committee kept in sealed cover/covers and with reference
to the date of promotion of his next junior on the basis of such
findings. The officer shall be promoted even if it requires to revert the
junior-most officiating person. Such promotion would be with
reference to the date of promotion of his junior and in these cases,
the officer will be paid arrears of salary and allowances.

18.2 If a penalty is imposed on the officer as a result of the
disciplinary proceedings or if he is found guilty in the criminal prosecution
against him, the findings of the sealed cover/covers shall not be acted upon.
His case for promotion may be considered by the next Screening Committee
in the normal course, having regard to the penalty imposed on him. In such
cases, the question of arrears may be decided by taking into account all the
facts and circumstances of the disciplinary/criminal proceedings. Where
arrears of salary or a part thereof are denied, the reasons for doing so shall
be recorded.

19. THREE MONTHLY REVIEW OF SEALED COVER CASES

It is necessary to ensure that the disciplinary case/criminal
prosecution instituted against an officer is not unduly prolonged and all
efforts to expeditiously finalise the proceedings are taken so that the need for
keeping the cases of officers in sealed cover/covers is limited to the barest
minimum. The concerned State Governments shall comprehensively review
such cases on the expiry of three months from the date of convening of the
first Screening Committee which had

adjudged his suitability and kept its findings in the sealed cover. Such a
review should be done subsequently also after every three months. The
review shall, inter alia, cover the progress made in the disciplinary
proceedings/criminal prosecution and further measures required to be taken
to expedite their completion. The material/evidence collected in the
investigations would also be scrutinized to determine in cases involving
suspensions whether there is a prima-facie case for initiating disciplinary
action or sanctioning prosecution against the officer. If as a result of such a
review, the State Govt. comes to a conclusion that there is prima facie no
case, the sealed cover would be opened and the officer concerned would be
given his due promotion with reference to the position assigned to him by
the DPC.

Same procedure is to be followed in considering the cases of
confirmation.
 13

20. AD HOC PROMOTIONS IN CASES WHERE
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS ARE
PROLONGED.

As appointment of the members of the Indian Administrative
Service to various grades is made on regular basis and the provision of one-
time confirmation exists in their cases, the concept of grant of ad hoc
promotion is alien to them. Unlike Central Government servants, ad hoc
promotions are not to be allowed in their cases even if the disciplinary
cases/criminal prosecutions instituted against them are found to have been
prolonged. In their cases, only three-monthly review of their
disciplinary/criminal cases is to be undertaken and efforts are to be made to
expedite their completion.

21. SEALED COVER PROCEDURE APPLICABLE TO
OFFICERS IN WHOSE CASES CONTINGENCIES OF PARA 11.1
SUPRA ARISE BEFORE ACTUAL PROMOTION’

In the case of an officer recommended for promotion by the Screening
Committee where any of the circumstances mentioned in para 11 above arise
before actual promotion, sealed cover procedure would be followed. The
subsequent Committee shall assess the suitability of such officers along with
other eligible candidates and place their assessment in sealed cover. The
sealed cover/covers will be opened on conclusion of the disciplinary
case/criminal prosecution. In case the officer is completely exonerated, he
would be promoted as per the procedure outlines in para 18 above and the
question of grant of arrears would also be decided accordingly. If any
penalty is imposed upon him as a result of the disciplinary proceedings or if
he is found guilty in the criminal prosecution against him, the findings of
the sealed cover shall not be acted upon, as outlined in para 18.2 above.

22. VALIDITY OF THE PANEL’

A panel for promotion recommended by the Committee and
approved by the State Governments shall be valid till all the officers placed
in the panel have been promoted. This will, of course,

exclude officers who are away on deputation but they do not opt to rejoin the
cadre in the higher post or are on study leave or training.

23. REVIEW COMMITTEE MEETING

23.1 The proceedings of any Committee may be reviewed only if the
Committee had not taken all the material facts into consideration or if
material facts were not brought to their notice or if there were grave errors
in the procedure followed by them. Special review may also be done in
cases where adverse remarks in an officer’s ACRs are expunged or
modified. The Review Committee would consider only those officers who
were eligible as on the date of meeting of the Original Committee. They
would also restrict their scrutiny of the ACRs for the period relevant to the
first Committee meeting. If any adverse remarks relating to the relevant
period were toned down or expunged, the modified ACRs should be
considered as if the original adverse remarks did not exist at all. Before
 14

doing so, the appointment authority would scrutinize the relevant cases with
a view to decide whether or not a review by the Committee is justified,
keeping in mind the nature of the adverse remarks toned down or expunged.
While considering a deferred case or review of the case of a superseded
officer, if the Committee finds the officer fit for promotion/confirmation, it
would place him at the appropriate place in the relevant panel after taking
into account the toned-down remarks or expunged remarks, as the case may
be.

23.2 If the officers placed junior to the above-said officer have been
promoted, the latter should be promoted immediately and if there is no
vacancy, the junior-most person officiating in the higher grade should be
reverted to accommodate him. On promotion, his pay should be fixed at the
stage it would have reached had he been promoted from the date the officer
immediately below him was so promoted, but no arrears for the past periods
would be admissible. In the case of confirmation, if the officer concerned is
recommended for confirmation on the basis of a review, he should be
confirmed from the due date.

24. AVAILABITY OF VACANCIES

Whenever promotions are vacancy based, while computing the
available vacancies for filling up the same by promoting officers placed in
the panel, care should be taken to ensure that the total ex-cadre posts created in
various grades for the purpose do not exceed in sum the permissible quota of State
Deputation Reserves indicated in the respective Cadre Schedules. Provisions of
rule 9(7) of the LAS (Pay) Rules, 1954 would also require to be followed while making
promotions in the highest grade of the Service.

25. SUPERSESSION OF OFFICERS

If an officer has not been included in the panel for promotion to any of
grades, the detailed reasons for his supersession may be recorded in writing.
Such officers would be eligible for reconsideration after earning two more
reports, except in the case of promotion in the grade of Chief Secretary, in which
case an officer would be eligible for reconsideration after earning only one more report.

Sk a a ook
 