GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN

FINANCE DEPARTMENT

RULES DIVISION

——
RAJASTHAN CIVIL SERVICES

(PENSION) RULES, 1996

(AMENDED UPTO 31°" MAY 2007)
 TABLE OF CONTENTS

RAJASTHAN CIVIL SERVICES (PENSION) RULES, 1996

Rule No. Pages

CHAPTER | - PRELIMINARY AND GENERAL CONDITIONS

A - PRELIMINARY

Short title and commencement. 1
Application. 1
Definitions. 1-3

B - GENERAL CONDITIONS

4 Regulation of claims to pension or 3
family pension.

5 Limitation on number of pensions. 3

6 Pension subject to future good conduct. 3-4

rg Right of Governor to withhold or withdraw pension. 5-8

8 Claim to pension when inadmissible 8-9

9 Commercial employment after retirement. 9-12

10 Restriction on practice in Sales Tax 12-13
and other cases after retirement.

11 Employment after retirement under a 13
Government outsides India.

CHAPTER II - QUALIFYING SERVICE

12 Commencement of qualifying service. 14

13 Conditions subject to which service qualifies. 14

14 Government's power to declare any 14-16
service as qualifying service.

15 Counting of service as Apprentice. 17

16 Counting of service on probation. 17

17 Counting of service on contract. 17

18 Counting of pre retirement civil 17-18
service in the case of re-employed
Government servants.

19 Counting of military service rendered 18-19
before civil employment.

20 Counting of periods spent on leave. 19-20

21 Counting of periods spent on training. 20
 22
23
24
25
26
27
28

29

30
31
32
33

34

35
36
37
38
39

40

41
42
43
44

45
46
47

Counting of periods of suspension. 20
Forfeiture of service on dismissal or removal. 21
Counting of past service on reinstatement. 21
Forfeiture of service on resignation. 21-22
Effect of interruption in service. 22-23
Condonation of interruption in service. 23-24
Period of deputation to United Nations 24-25

and other organisations.

Verification of qualifying service 25
after 25 years service or 5 years
before retirement.

CHAPTER III - CLASSES OF PENSIONS AND CONDITIONS
GOVERNING THEIR GRANT.

Superannuation Pension 26-27
Combined appointments. शा
Retiring Pension. 28
Pension on absorption in or under a 28

corporation, company or body.

Payment of lump sum amount to 28
persons on absorption in or under
a corporation, company or body.

Invalid Pension. 28-30
Special precaution in the Police. 30
Restriction. 30
Compensation Pension. 30-32
Discharge to make room for better 32
qualified persons will not be treated

as abolition.

Non-admissibility of pension on 32

discharge after completion of
specified term of service.

Discharge within the period of contract. 32
Compulsory retirement pension. 32-33
Compassionate allowance. 34-35
Rules regulating the Compassionate Fund. 35

CHAPTER IV - EMOLUMENTS

Emoluments. 36-40
Allowances which do not count. 40-41
Net Emoluments taken. 41
 48

49

50

51

52

53

53A

54

55
56
57
58
59

60
61
62
63

64

65

66

Regulation of pension on holding more 41
than one appointment.

No increase in pension for holding 41
more than one office conjointly.
CHAPTER V - REGULATION OF AMOUNTS OF PENSION
A - (i) PREMATURE RETIREMENT
Retirement on completion of 20 years’ 42-44
qualifying service.

Addition to qualifying service on 44
voluntary retirement.

Addition to qualifying service 44
on voluntary retirement by employees
declared surplus.

Compulsory retirement on completion of 45-49
25 years qualifying service.

Compulsory retirement of a Government servant 50
who has more than three children.

A - (ii) AMOUNT OF PENSION
Amount of Pension. 50-68

8 - RETIREMENT / DEATH GRATUITY

Retirement / Death Gratuity. 69-71
Persons to whom gratuity is payable. 71-75
Debarring a person from receiving gratuity. 75
Lapse of retirement gratuity / death gratuity. 76
Nominations. 76-78

C - FAMILY PENSION RULES

Applicability. 79
Admissibility of pension. 79-80
Amount of family pension. 81-87
Family pension not admissible on award 88

of extra ordinary pension.

Regulation of family pension to the 88
family of a re-employed military pensioner.

Family pension not to be granted to 88
a person in receipt of or eligible for
the same from other sources.

Definitions. 88-89

ili
 67 Condition of grant. 89-90
68 Order of allotment. 90-91

69 Family pension not payable to more than 92
one member of the family at the same time.

70 Family pension to be given to the 92
eldest eligible child.

71 Payment of family pension to the 92
guardian on behalf of minor.

72 Regulation of pension in case both 92
wife and husband are Government servants.

73 Suspension of family pension if the 93
recipient is charged with the offence
of murdering the Government servant etc.

74 Communication of details of family by 93
the Government servant.

75 Ex-gratia grant to the family of a 93-95
Government servant who dies while on
duty in certain circumstances.

76 Ex-gratia grant to the family of a Police/ 96
Civil Defence & Home Guard personnel
who die due to injury intentionally
inflicted while on duty by a terrorist.

D - DEARNESS RELIEF ON PENSION / FAMILY PENSION
77 Dearness Relief on Pension/ Family Pension. 96-98
E - INTERIM RELIEF ON PENSION / FAMILY PENSION

TTA Interim Relief on Pension/ Family 98
Pension.

CHAPTER VI - DETERMINATION AND AUTHORISATION OF THE AMOUNTS
OF PENSION AND GRATUITY

A - PENSION AND GRATUITY
78 Preparation of list of Government 99
servants due for retirement.

79 Intimation to the Directorate 100
of Estates/ Public Works Department
regarding issue of “No Demand Certificate”.

80 Preparation of pension papers. 100-101
81 Stages for completion of pension papers. 101-103
82 Completion of pension papers. 103
83 Forwarding of pension papers to 104

Director, Pension Department.

iv
 84

85

86

87

88
89
90

91
92
93

94

Intimation to the Director, 104-105
Pension Department, regarding any

event having bearing on pension.

Intimation of the particulars of 105
Government dues to the Director,

Pension Department, Rajasthan.

Provisional Pension. 105-106
Authorisation of pension and gratuity 106-108
by the Director, Pension Department.

Government servant on foreign service. 108
Interest on delayed payment of gratuity. 109-112
Provisional pension where 112
department or judicial proceedings

may be pending.

Revision of pension after authorisation. 113
Recovery and adjustment of Government dues. 113-114
Adjustment and recovery of dues pertaining 114-115
to Government accommodation.

Adjustment and recovery of dues other than 115-118

dues pertaining to Government accommodation.

B - FAMILY PENSION AND DEATH GRATUITY IN RESPECT OF GOVERNMENT
SERVANTS DURING WHILE IN SERVICE

95

96
97

98

103

104

Obtaining of claims for family pension 119

and death gratuity.

Completion of Form 18. 119-120
Determination of the amount of family 120-121
pension and gratuity where service

records are incomplete.

Forwarding the papers to the 121-122
Director, Pension Department.

Sanction, drawal and disbursement of 122
provisional family pension and gratuity.

Authorisation of final pension and balance 122-123
of the gratuity by the Director, Pension.

Adjustment of Government dues. 123-125
Payment of family pension and death 125
gratuity when a Government servant

dies while on deputation.

Procedure to be adopted for grant of 125
family pension under provisos to rule

61 of the Family Pension Rules.

Endorsement of the family pension 125-126

entitlement of post retiral spouse in
 105

106

107

108

127

128

the Pension Payment Order of pensioners.

Procedure in respect of ex-gratia 126
grant under Rule 75.

Procedure in respect of ex-gratia 127
grant under Rule 76.

C - FAMILY PENSION AND RESIDUARY GRATUITY IN RESPECT
OF DECEASED PENSIONERS

Sanction of family pension and residuary 127-129
gratuity on the death of a pensioner.

Authorisation of payment by the Director, 129
Pension Department.

CHAPTER VII - SPECIAL PENSIONARY AWARDS

Applicability. 130
Applicability of Award. 130
Amount of Award. 130-132
Definition of emoluments. 132
Dearness Relief/ Interim Relief. 132
Procedure. 132-135

CHAPTER VIII - EXTRAORDINARY PENSIONS

Extent of application. 136
Definitions. 136-137
Condition for accepting disablement/ 137-138
death due to Government service.

Conditions of Award. 138
Effect of Award on other pensionary benefits. 138
Award when inadmissible. 138
Determination of percentage of disability. 139
Amount of Disability Pension Award. 139
Amount of Award (EOP) to family. 139-140
Award to other members of the deceased family. 140
Date from which award to the family effective. 140
Continuance of award to widow or remarriage 140
with her deceased husband’s brother.

Procedure. 140-172

CHAPTER IX - PAYMENTS OF PENSIONS

Date from which pension becomes payable. 173

vi
 129 Currency in which pension is payable. 173

130 Manner of payment of gratuity and pension. 173
131 Date of payment of extra ordinary pension. 173
132 Application of Treasury Rules. 173
133 Personal appearance for identification. 173-174
134 Authorities for signing a life certificate. 174
135 Drawing of pension through an Agent. 174
136 Verification of continued existence of 174-175
a pensioner once a year.
137 Drawing of pension through an authorised agent. 175
138 Transfer of payment to another State. 176
139 Transfer of payment from one Treasury 176

to another or to a Sub Treasury under
a District Treasury.

140 Certificate of non-employment. 176-177
141 Renewal of Pension Payment Order. 177
142 Issue of new Pension Payment Order on loss. 177
143 Lapses and Forfeiture. 177
144 Payment of difference of pension to the 177

missing pensioner on his re-appearance.

145 Payment of arrears of pension 177-178
of deceased pensioner without producing
of usual legal authority.

146 Payment of arrears of pension 178
of ‘unheard of pensioners.

147 Payment of arrears of family pension 178
under second proviso to rule 61 in case
of a missing Government servant.

148 No claim to pension of heirs 178
when a Government servant dies
before retirement or discharge.

CHAPTER X - FIXATION OF PAY OF RE-EMPLOYED PENSIONERS

149 Applicability. 179

150 Definitions. 179

151 Re-employment after superannuation or 179-180
retiring pension.

152 Fixation of pay of re-employed pensioners. 180-184

153 Drawal of increments. 184

154 Personnel retiring on Invalid or 184

Compensation pension.

vii
 155
156
157
158
159
160
161

162

163

164

165
166
167
168

Promotion / Transfer.

Allowances.

Special Pay on re-employment.
Leave and Leave Salary.

Gratuity, Death/ Retirement Gratuity.
Retrenched employees.

Extra-ordinary pension admissible
during re-employment.

Pensioner to declare amount of pension
to the appointing authority.

Details to be called for from the Head of
Office/ Pensioner/ Director, Pension Department.

Authority competent to fix the pay.
CHAPTER XI - MISCELLANEOUS

Interpretation.
Power to relax.
Power to delegate.

Repeal and saving.

viii

184
184
184
185
185
185
185

185-186

186

186-188

189
189
189
189-190
 LIST OF APPENDICES

Appendices Pages

I Rajasthan Civil Services (Commutation of 191-224
Pension) Rules, 1996.

ll The Rajasthan Pensioners Act, 1958 (Rajasthan 225-227
Act No. 27 of 1958).

Ill Grant of Dearness Relief to State Government Pensioners. 228-268

IV The Rajasthan Civil Services (Medical Examination) Rules, 1996. 269-272

Vv Rules regulating the Compassionate Fund of the 273-281
Government of Rajasthan.

Vi Scheme for payment of pension of Rajasthan Government 282-301
Civil Pensioners by Public Sector Banks.

Vil Rules regulating the incidence of pay, allowances, pension 302-304
etc. between the Rajasthan Government and the Central
Government and other State Governments and vice versa.

Vill Instructions for Head of Office/ Department for 305-309
timely finalisation of pension cases.

IX Pro-rata retirement benefits to Government 310-333
Servants permanently transferred to Public
Sector Undertakings, Autonomous Bodies etc.

Section |
Permanent Transfer of Rajasthan Government Servants to 311-318
the State Public Sector Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies.

Section Il
Conversion of Government Department/ Office into 319-321
A State Autonomous Body or Public Sector Undertaking.

Section Ill
Transfer of State Government employees to Central 322-324
Autonomous Bodies/ Statutory Bodies, and vice-versa.

Section IV
Formats 325-331

Section V
Transfer of State Government employees to public 332-333

enterprise under the control of the Government of India.

ix
 XIl

The Payment of Arrears of Pension and Commutation
(Nomination) Rules, 1996.

Action to be taken by retiring Government servants
for timely authorisation of their pensions.

Grant of Interim Relief to the State Government
pensioners / Family pensioners.

334-340

341-343

344-345
 FORMS

Form No. Pages

1 Nomination for Retirement Gratuity/ Death Gratuity - 346-347
when the Government servant has a family.

2 Nomination for Retirement Gratuity/ Death Gratuity - 348-349
when the Government servant has no family.
Details of family. 350
Form of Option to workcharged employees 351
governed by C.P.F. Rules.

5 Particulars to be obtained by the Head of Office 352
from the retiring Government servant eight
months before the date of his retirement.

5A Details of particulars of Government 353
servant under Form 5.
Form of Order of retirement. 354
Form of assessing pension and gratuity. 355-362
Form of letter to the Director, Pension Department, 363-364
forwarding the pension papers of a Government servant.

9 Form of declaration by the Government servant 365
for counting specified period of service.

9A Form of Order of admitting service for pension or the 366
basis of declaration etc. of the Government servant.

10 Form of letter to the member or members of the family of 367
a deceased Government servant where valid nomination
for the grant of death gratuity exists.

11 Form of letter to the member or members 368
of the family of a deceased Government
servant where valid nomination for the
grant of death gratuity does not exists.

12 Form of application for the grant of 369-370
death gratuity on the death of a
Government servant.

13 Form of letter to the widow/ widower of a deceased 371
Government servant for grant of Family Pension.

14 Form of application for grant of Family 372-373
Pension on the death of a Government
servant/pensioner.

14A Form of details of particulars for family pension. 374

15 Form of application for grant of family pension 375
when a pensioner is unheard for more than
one year and the pension remained undrawn.

15A Form of Affidavit in case of a missing pensioner. 376

xi
 15B
16

16A
16B

17

18

19

20

21

22

23
24

25

Form of Indemnity Bond in case of a missing pensioner.

Form of application for grant of Family
Pension when a Government servant is
unheard of for more than one year.

Form of Affidavit in case of a missing Government servant.

Form of Indemnity Bond in case of a
missing Government servant.

Form of Application for ex-gratia grant
under certain circumstances.

Form for assessing and authorising the payment of
family pension and death gratuity when a
Government servant dies while in service.

Form of letter to the Director, Pension Department,
forwarding papers for the grant of family pension
and death gratuity to the family of a Government
servant who dies while in service.

Form of letter sanctioning Family

Pension to the child or children of a

retired Government servant who dies after
retirement but does not leave behind a
widow/ widower.

Form of letter sanctioning Family Pension
to the child or children on the death or
re-marriage of a widow/ widower who was
in receipt of family pension.

Form of application for the grant of
residuary gratuity on the death of a
pensioner.

Form of medical certificate.

Form of certificate of verification
of service for pension.

Form of application for permission to State Service
Officers to accept commercial employment
within a period of two years after retirement.

xii

377-378
379

380
381-382

383-384

385-392

393

394-395

396-397

398-399

400
401

402-403
 26

27

27A

28

28A

29

30

Statements for Monitoring and Reporting
System (No. 1 to 4).

Form of application to Directorate of Estates/ P.W.D.
for issue of No Demand Certificate in respect of
Government accommodation.

Form of certificate where no Government accommodation
has been occupied by the Government servant.

Form of application to Treasury Officer for issue
of N.D.C. in respect of Long term advances.

Form of certificate by the Government servant
where no L.T.A. has been taken by him.

Form of intimation regarding death of a
pensioner where payment of family pension
has been authorised to the widow/ widower.

Form of application by a pensioner for endorsement
of particulars of spouse post retrial marriage.

Form of tentative Last Pay Certificate.
Form of certificate for counting officiating pay.
Form for sanctioning provisional pension/
F.P. and Retirement / Death Gratuity.

List of Forms appended to the relevant Chapters
Form of Indemnity Bond for payment of minor’s share
without production of guardianship certificate.

Form of application for family pension
under Special Pensionary Awards — Annexure.

Form of Declaration under the Annuexure above.

Form of application for Disability
Pension under E.O.P. Rules.

Form of application for family
pension under E.O.P. Rules.

404-408

409

410

411-412

413

414

415-416

417-418
419
420-423

Form of Report of Medical Board. Form ‘A’ to ‘E’

Form of Report of Medical Board
on accident and self inflicted injuries.

Form of Report of Medical Board
on other cases.

xiii

in Schedule IV
to Chapter VIII
 GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
(RULES DIVISION)

NOTIFICATION
No. F.1(4)FD(Gr.2)/94 Jaipur, dated the Sept. 18, 1996
Subject : Rajasthan Civil Services(Pension) Rules, 1996.

In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution,
the Governor is pleased to make the following rules regarding the conditions of service of
persons appointed to service and posts in connection with the affairs of Rajasthan.

CHAPTER |
PRELIMINARY AND GENERAL CONDITIONS.

A - PRELIMINARY.
1. Short Title and Commencement
(1) These rules may be called the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.
(2) They shall come into force with effect from 1.10.1996.

2. Application

Save as otherwise provided in these rules, these rules shall apply to Government
servants appointed to Civil services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Rajasthan
State which are borne on pensionable establishments, but shall not apply to -

(a) persons in casual, daily rated and work-charged employment;

(b) persons paid from contingencies;

(c) persons entitled to the benefit of a Contributory Provident Fund;

(d) members of the All India Services;

(e) persons employed on contract except when the contract provides otherwise;

(f) | persons whose terms and conditions of service are regulated by or under the
provisions of the Constitution or any other law for the time being in force; and

*(g) Government servants appointed to the civil services of the State on or after the
17 day of January, 2004.”

3. Definitions
(1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires -
(a) ‘allottee’ means a Government servant to whom Government
accommodation has been allotted;

(b) ‘child’ means a child of the Government servant, who, if a son, is under
twenty five years of age and if a daughter, is unmarried and is under
twenty five years of age and the expression ‘children’ shall be construed
accordingly;

dg Inserted vide FD Notification No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)/97 dated 14.1.2004 w.e.f 1.1.2004.
 (d)

(0)

(1)

(०)

(0)

(५)

‘Dearness relief means relief as defined in rule 77;

‘Director, Pension’ means Director, Pension and Pensioners Welfare
Department, Rajasthan;

‘emoluments’ means emoluments as defined in rule 45;

‘family pension’ means family pension admissible under Chapter V C, but
does not include Dearness Relief and Interim Relief;

‘foreign service’ means service in which a Government servant receives
his pay with the sanction of the Government from any source other than
the Consolidated Fund;

‘Form’ means a Form appended to these rules;

‘Government’ means the State Government of Rajasthan;
‘Government dues’ means dues as defined in sub rule (3) of rule 92;
‘gratuity’ includes -

(i) ‘service gratuity’ payable under sub rule (1) of rule 54;

(ii) ‘retirement gratuity/death gratuity payable under sub-rule(1) of Rule
55; and

(iii) ‘residuary gratuity’ payable under sub rule (2) of Rule 55.

‘Head of Department’ means an authority specified in the General
Financial and Accounts Rules of the Rajasthan Government and includes
such other authority or person whom the Government may, by order
specify as Head of a Department;

‘Head of Office’ means a Gazetted Officer who is declared as such under
Rule 3 of the General Financial & Accounts Rules, and includes such
other authority or person whom the competent authority may, by order,
specify as Head of Office;

‘Local Fund administered by Government’ means the fund administered
by a body which, by law or rule having the force of law, comes under the
control of the Government and over whose expenditure the Government
retains complete and direct control;

‘minor’ means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen
years;

‘pension’ includes gratuity except when the term pension is used in
contradistinction to gratuity; but does not include dearness relief and
Interim Relief;

‘Pension Disbursing Authority’ means -
(i) Treasury including sub-treasury, or
(ii) Pension Payment Officer, or

(iii) Branch of a nationalised bank.
 (r) ‘qualifying service’ means service rendered while on duty or otherwise
which shall be taken into account for the purpose of pensions and
gratuities admissible under these rules;

(s) ‘retirement benefit’ includes pension or service gratuity, and retirement
gratuity where admissible;

(t) ‘Service Book’ includes service roll, if any;

(u) ‘Treasury’ includes a Sub Treasury.

(2) Words and expression used herein and not defined but defined in the
Rajasthan Service Rules have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Rules.

B - GENERAL CONDITIONS.

4. Regulation of claims to pension or family pension

(1) Any claim to pension or family pension shall be regulated by the provisions of
these rules in force at the time when a Government servant retires or is retired or is
discharged or is allowed to resign from service or dies, as the case may be.

(2) The day on which a Government servant retires or is retired or is discharged
or is allowed to resign from service, as the case may be, shall be treated as his last working
day. The day of death shall also be treated as a working day.

Provided that in the case of a Government servant who is retired prematurely or who
retires voluntarily under sub rule (1) of rule 53 and sub-rule (1) of rule 50, as the case may
be, the date of retirement shall be treated as a non-working day.

5. Limitations on number of pensions

(1) A Government servant shall not earn two pensions in the same service or
post at the same time or by the same continuous service.

(2) Two Government servants may not simultaneously count service in respect of
the same office.

(3) A Government servant who, having retired on a superannuation pension or
retiring pension, is subsequently re-employed shall not be entitled to a separate pension or
gratuity for the period of his re-employment.

6. Pension subject to future good conduct

(1) (a) Future good conduct shall be an implied condition of every grant of
pension and its continuance under these rules.

(b) The appointing authority may, by order in writing, withhold or withdraw a pension
or a part thereof, whether permanently or for a specified period, if the pensioner is convicted
of a serious crime or is found guilty of grave misconduct.

Provided that where a part of pension is withheld or withdrawn, the amount of such
pension shall not be reduced below the amount of rupees three hundred per mensem.

(2) Where a pensioner is convicted of a serious crime by a Court of Law, action
under sub rule (1) shall be taken in the light of the judgement of the court relating to such
conviction.
 (3) In a case not falling under sub-rule (2), if the authority referred to in sub-rule
(1) considers that the pensioner is prima facie guilty of grave misconduct, it shall before
passing an order under sub rule (1),

(a) serve upon the pensioner a notice specifying the action proposed to be taken
against him and the ground on which it is proposed to be taken and calling
upon him to submit, within fifteen days of the receipt of the notice or such
further time not exceeding fifteen days as may be allowed by the appointing
authority, such representation as he may wish to make against the proposal;
and

(b) take into consideration the representation, if any, submitted by the pensioner
under clause (a).

(4) Where the authority competent to pass an order under sub rule (1) is the
Governor, the Rajasthan Public Service Commission shall be consulted before the order is
passed.

(5) An appeal against an order under sub rule (1), passed by any authority other than
the Governor, shall lie to the Governor and the Governor shall, in consultation with the
Rajasthan Public Service Commission, pass such orders on the appeal as he deems fit.

EXPLANATION In this rule, -

(a) the expression ‘serious crime’ includes a crime involving an offence under the
Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923);

(b) the expression ‘grave misconduct’ includes the communication or disclosure
of any secret official code or password or any sketch, plan, model, article,
note, document or information, such as is mentioned in Section 5 of the
Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923) (which was obtained while holding
office under the Government) so as to prejudicially affect the interests of the
general public or the security of the State.

NOTE
This rule applies as well to family pension under Chapter V.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Stoppage or reduction of pension for reasons other than misconduct,
not permissible.

Pensions are not in the nature of reward but there is a binding obligation on
Government which can be claimed as a right. Their forfeiture is only on resignation, removal
or dismissal from service. After a pension is sanctioned its continuance depends on future
good conduct (Rule 6 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996), but it cannot be stopped or reduced
for other reasons.

2. Intimation of cases of convicted pensioners.

Since under Rule 6 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, future good conduct is an
implied condition of the grant of every pension and Government has the right to withhold or
withdraw a pension or any part of it if the pensioner is convicted of a serious crime or found
guilty of grave misconduct, it is necessary to ensure that cases where pensioners are
convicted by a Court of any crime are also brought to the notice of the Government. The
prosecuting officers should ensure the prompt intimation of such cases to the administrative
departments and Heads of Departments concerned.
 7. Right of Governor to withhold or withdraw pension

(1) The Governor reserves to himself the right of withholding or withdrawing a
pension or part thereof, whether permanently or for a specified period, and of ordering
recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the
Government, if in any departmental or judicial proceedings, the pensioner is found guilty of
grave misconduct or negligence during the period of his service including service rendered
upon re-employment after retirement:

Provided that the Rajasthan Public Service Commission shall be consulted before
any final orders are passed:

Provided further that where a part of pension is withheld or withdrawn, the amount of
such pension shall not be reduced below the amount of ‘rupees one thousand two hundred
seventy five per mensem.”

(2) (a) The departmental proceedings referred to in sub rule (1), if instituted while
the Government servant was in service whether before his retirement or during his re-
employment, shall, after the final retirement of the Government servant, be deemed to be
proceedings under this rule and shall be continued and concluded by the authority by which
they were commenced in the same manner as if the Government servant had continued in
service:

Provided that where the departmental proceedings are instituted by an authority
subordinate to the Governor, that authority shall submit a report recording its findings to the
Governor.

(b) The departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the Government servant
was in service, whether before his retirement, or during his re-employment-

(i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the Governor,

(ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years
before such institution, and

(iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such place as the Governor may
direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental
proceedings in which an order of dismissal from service could be made in
relation to the Government servant during his service.

(3) No judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the Government servant was in
service, whether before his retirement or during his re-employment, shall be instituted in
respect of a cause of action which arose, or in respect of an event which took place, more
than four years before such institution.

(4) In the case of a Government servant who has retired on attaining the age of
superannuation or otherwise and against whom any departmental or judicial proceedings
are instituted or where departmental proceedings are continued under sub rule (2), a
provisional pension as provided in Rule 90 shall be sanctioned.

(5) Where the Governor decides not to withhold or withdraw pension but orders
recovery of pecuniary loss from pension, the recovery shall not ordinarily be made at a rate
exceeding one third of the pension admissible on the date of retirement of a Government
servant.

1. The existing words "rupees three hundred per mensem" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated
21.3.1998 w.e.f 1.10.1996.
 (6) For the purpose of this rule, -

(a) departmental proceedings shall be deemed to be instituted on the date on
which the charges together with a statement of allegations on which they are
based, or the proposal of Government to take disciplinary action together with
the allegations on which it is proposed to be taken, are issued to the
Government servant or pensioner, or if the Government servant has been
placed under suspension from an earlier date, on such date; and

(b) judicial proceedings shall be deemed to be instituted -

(i) in the case of criminal proceeding, on the date on which the complaint or
report of a police officer, of which the Magistrate takes cognizance, is
made, and

(ii) in the case of civil proceedings, on the date the plaint is presented in the
court.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS
1. Scope of expression ‘grave misconduct’.

The term ‘grave misconduct’ is wide enough to include ‘corrupt practice’. In cases
where the charge of corruption is proved after pension has been sanctioned, action to
withhold or withdraw pension may be taken under rule 7. In this connection the provisions of
this rule (i.e. 7) are to be noted carefully.

The property or pecuniary resources in respect of which the departmental or judicial
proceedings are instituted under Rule 7 of the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, should have
been in possession of the person concerned or of any other person on his behalf at any time
within the period of four years before the institution of such proceedings, if the same were
not instituted while the officer was on duty either before his retirement or during re-
employment.

2. Consultation with R.P.S.C., a measure of safeguard for pensioners.

A question was raised whether the R.P.S.C. has to be consulted under Rule 7 only in
cases which involve Gazetted Officers. It was held that the R.P.S.C. should be consulted in
all cases before final orders to withhold or withdraw a pension or any part of it in terms of
this rule are passed. This is a measure of safeguard for pensioners. Similarly the provision
of departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was on duty, should not be
instituted save with the sanction of Governor is also for the pensioner’s safeguard.

3. Governor’s right to withhold or withdraw pension in full is absolute.

There is nothing in the language of Rule 7 to restrict the right of the Governor to
withholding only a part of the pension in the case dealt with by this provision. On the other
hand, the words “withholding or withdrawing a pension” clearly convey that the Governor is
competent to withhold or withdraw the full pension. While to “restrict the amount of withheld
pension to one third of the pension originally sanctioned” in the order may be applied in
cases where the order is for recovery of losses from pension, it has no bearing on the
question of Government's right to withhold or withdraw the pension and Government may
order the full pension to be withheld or withdrawn.
 4. Final order under Rule 7 will be issued in the name of the Governor.

(i) It is clarified that the function of the Disciplinary Authority is only to reach a finding
on the charges and to submit a report recording its findings to the Government. It is then for
the Government to consider the findings and take a final decision under Rule 7. In case
Government decide to take action under Rule 7 in the light of the findings of the Disciplinary
Authority, the Government will consult the Rajasthan Public Service Commission. If as a
result of such consideration in consultation with the Commission, it is decided to pass an
order, necessary orders will be issued in the name of the Governor.

(ii) The procedure outlined in the preceding paragraph will also apply to a case
where the Governor functions as the Disciplinary Authority.

5. Grant of cent per cent provisional pension under Rule 90 mandatory even if
departmental or judicial proceedings are continued

The payment of provisional pension under these rules is mandatory. The view that in
cases where the departmental proceedings instituted against a Government servant were
for a major penalty and in which ultimately no pension might become payable on the
conclusion of the proceedings after his retirement under Rule 7 of the R.C.S. (Pension)
Rules, 1996, even the provisional pension need not be sanctioned, is against the letter and
spirit of the rule. The provisional pension under Rule 90 ibid should not be denied to the
retired Government servants.

Rule 90 provides that the provisional pension in such cases should not exceed the
maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of the qualifying service
up to the date of retirement of the Government servant. It has been decided that even in
cases covered by the above mentioned rule, hundred per cent pension, which is otherwise
admissible to the Government servants should be authorised as provisional pension, as in
cases of normal retirement. No gratuity shall, however, be paid at this stage.

6. Minor penalty proceedings no effect on pension

Sub rule (1) of Rule 7 of the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, confers on the Governor
the right to withhold or withdraw the pension or a part thereof, either permanently or for
specified period, and to order recovery from the pension, of the whole or a part of any
pecuniary loss caused to the Government, if, in any departmental or judicial proceedings,
the pensioner is found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence during the period of his
service including service rendered upon re-employment on retirement. Sub rule (2) of this
Rule provides that the departmental proceedings, referred to in sub rule (1), if instituted
before the retirement of a Government servant or during his re-employment shall after his
final retirement, be deemed to be proceedings under this Rule and shall be continued and
concluded. Accordingly, the minor penalty proceedings and the major penalty proceedings,
which are instituted against a Government servant while in service and which do not get
concluded before the date of retirement, automatically become proceedings under Rule 7
ibid. However, since grave misconduct or negligence cannot be established as a result of
minor penalty proceedings, action under Rule 7 ibid for withholding or withdrawing pension
etc., cannot be taken against a pensioner in respect of whom minor penalty proceedings
had been instituted and have been continued after retirement, therefore, do not literally have
any effect on the pension in the matter of reducing or withholding of his pension. The
disciplinary authorities should take note of this position and take steps to see that minor
penalty proceedings instituted against Government servants, who are due to retire, are
finalised quickly and in time before the date of retirement, so that the need for continuing
such minor penalty proceedings beyond the date of retirement does not arise.
 7. Disciplinary authority who instituted proceedings can drop them without
submitting its findings to the Governor

The disciplinary authority which instituted the proceedings against the official before
retirement, can drop the proceedings itself after superannuation of the official without
submitting its findings to the Governor, if it, on the basis of the defence of the official or the
report of the inquiring authority, comes to the conclusion that action under Rule 7 of the
Pension Rules is not justified. There is no need to submit a report regarding the findings of
the disciplinary authority to the Governor.

8. Disciplinary proceedings can continue after retirement even in case where
there is no pecuniary loss to Government

(i) The question whether disciplinary proceedings pertaining to a serious or grave act
of misconduct/negligence committed by a Government servant can be continued or
instituted in terms of Rule 9 of C.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1972, or other corresponding rules of
the Central Government (corresponding to Rule 7 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996), even if
no pecuniary loss was caused to the Government, has been the subject matter of a number
of Court/Tribunal cases. Because of the fact that divergent views were expressed by
different Courts and the Benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal, this issue was
referred to a Full Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal, in case of Amarjit Singh V.
Union of India (Administrative Tribunal Reporter 1988 (2) CAT 637). The Full Bench after
examining the matter at length, have held that institution/continuance of the proceedings is
not dependent upon any pecuniary loss being occasioned to the Government. Even in the
absence of any pecuniary loss, the pension of a pensioner can be withheld or withdrawn in
whole or part, after following the prescribed procedure, for an act of misconduct/negligence
committed while in service.

(ii) The above ruling of the Full Bench of CAT is brought to the notice of all
concerned so that the same is appropriately referred to in all those cases where
interpretation of Rule 7 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996 and other analogous rules is
involved.

9. In accordance with Section 9-A of Rajasthan Pensions Act, 1958, it is permissible
to effect recovery of Government dues outstanding against the Government servant at the
time of retirement or that subsequently found to be outstanding out of the amount of
gratuity/pension or both payable/paid to him or the members of his family, without obtaining
the consent of the retired Government servant or the members of his family, as the case
may be.

The sum due from the Government servant to an autonomous organisation is not
Government dues and so cannot be recovered out of gratuity/pension payable by the
Government except in cases where -

(i) | the Government servant has given his consent in writing to such a recovery
being made from his gratuity which has become payable to him, or

(ii) any sum is due from a Government servant on deputation to Rajasthan State
Electricity Board.
8. Claim to pension when inadmissible
In the following cases no claim to pension is admitted:-

(a) When a Government servant is appointed for a limited time only, or for a specified
duty, on the completion of which he is to be discharged.
 (b) When a person is employed temporarily on monthly wages without specified limit
of time or duty, but a month’s notice of discharge should be given to such a person, and his
wages must be paid for any period by which such notice falls short of a month.

(c) When a person’s whole time is not retained for the public service, but he is merely
paid for work done for the State.

NOTE

This clause applies among others, to Government Advocates and other Law Officers
not debarred from private practice.

(d) When a public servant holds some other pensionable office he earns no pension
in respect of an office of the kind mentioned in clause (c) or in respect of duties paid for by a
compensatory or other allowance.

(e) When a Government servant serves under a covenant which contains no
stipulation regarding pensions, unless Government specially authorise a Government
servant to count such service towards pension.

NOTE

The agreements should be so worded as to preserve the inviolate the indefeasible
right of Government to modify the rules from time to time, at their discretion, so that no claim
may arise to the benefits of the Rules as they stood at the date when any particular
agreement (covenant) was executed.

9. Commercial employment after retirement:-

(1) If a pensioner who, immediately before his retirement was a member of any
State Service wishes to accept any commercial employment before the expiry of two years
from the date of his retirement, he shall obtain the previous sanction of the Government to
such acceptance by submitting an application in Form 25.

Provided that a Government servant who was permitted by the Government to take
up a particular form of commercial employment during his leave preparatory to retirement or
during refused leave shall not be required to obtain subsequent permission for his
continuance in such employment after retirement.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub rule (3), the Government may, by order in
writing, on the application made under sub rule (1) by a pensioner, grant, subject to such
conditions, if any, as it may deem necessary, permission, or refuse, for reasons to be
recorded in the order, permission to such pensioner to take up the commercial employment
specified in the application.

(3) In granting or refusing permission under sub rule (2) to a pensioner for taking
up any commercial employment, the Government shall have regard to the following factors,
namely :-

(a) the nature of the employment proposed to be taken up and the antecedents of
the employer;

(b) whether his duties in the employment which he proposes to take up might be
such as to bring him into conflict with Government;
 (c) whether the pensioner while in service had any such dealing with the employer
under whom he proposes to seek employment as it might afford a reasonable
basis for the suspicion that such pensioner had shown favours to such
employer;

(d) whether the duties of the commercial employment proposed involve liaison or
contact work with Government departments;

(e) whether his commercial duties will be such that his previous official position or
knowledge or experience under Government could be used to give the
proposed employer an unfair advantage;

(f) | the emoluments offered by the proposed employer; and

(g) any other relevant factor.

NOTE

This would cover matters which may be in the knowledge of the Appointing Authority
but are not covered by the criteria enumerated in the rule itself, as well as matters on which
specific instructions may be issued by the Government from time to time supplementing the
prescribed criteria.

(4) Where within a period of sixty days of the date of receipt of an application
under sub rule (3), the Government does not refuse to grant the permission applied for or
does not communicate the refusal to the applicant, the Government shall be deemed to
have granted the permission applied for:

Provided that in any case where defective or insufficient information is furnished by
the applicant and it becomes necessary for Government to seek further clarifications and/or
information from him, the period of sixty days shall be counted from the date on which the
defects have been removed and/or complete information has been furnished by the
applicant.

NOTE

The time limit of 60 days specified in Rule 9 (4) of RCS (Pension) Rules, 1996,
should be counted only from the date when the application in the prescribed form is
submitted with all the particulars called for therein. If defective or insufficient information is
furnished by the applicant and it becomes necessary to make further reference to him, the
time limit should be counted only when the defects are removed or complete information is
furnished. While writing to the applicant calling for additional information or asking him to
supply any omission or to rectify any defect, it should also be made clear to him that the
time limit for deciding on his application will count only when he furnishes all the required
particulars or supplies the omission or rectifies the defect(s) in his application.

(5) Where the Government grants the permission applied for subject to any
conditions or refuses such permission, the applicant may, within thirty days of the receipt of
the order of the Government to that effect, make a representation against any such
condition or refusal and the Government may make such orders thereon as it deems fit:

Provided that no order other than an order cancelling such condition or granting such
permission without any conditions shall be made under this sub rule without giving the
pensioner making the representation an opportunity to show cause against the order
proposed to be made.

10
 (6) If any pensioner takes up any commercial employment at any time before the
expiry of two years from the date of his retirement without the prior permission of the
Government or commits a breach of any condition subject to which permission to take up
any commercial employment has been granted to him under this rule, it shall be competent
for the Government to declare by order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein that
he shall not be entitled to the whole or such part of the pension and for such periods as may
be specified in the order:

Provided that no such order shall be made without giving the pensioner concerned
an opportunity of showing cause against such declaration:

Provided further that in making any order under this sub-rule, the Government shall
have regard to the following factors, namely :-

(i) _ the financial circumstances of the pensioner concerned;

(ii) | the nature of, and the emoluments from, the commercial employment taken up
by the pensioner concerned, and

(iii) any other relevant factor.

(7) Every order passed by the Government under this rule shall be
communicated to the pensioner concerned.

(8) In this rule,-
(a) the expression “commercial employment” means -

(i) | an employment in any capacity including that of an agent, under a
company, cooperative society, firm or individual engaged in trading,
commercial, industrial, financial or professional business and includes
also a directorship of such company and partnership of such firm, but
does not include employment under a body corporate, wholly or
substantially owned or controlled by the Central Government or a State
Government;

(ii) | setting up practice, either independently or as a partner of a firm, as
adviser or consultant in matters in respect of which the pensioner -

(A) has no professional qualifications and the matters in respect of
which the practice is to be set up or is carried on are relatable to
his official knowledge or experience, or

(B) has professional qualifications but the matters in respect of which
the practice is to be set up are such as are likely to give his clients
an unfair advantage by reason of his previous official position, or

(C) has to undertake work involving liaison or contact with the offices
or officers of the Government.

EXPLANATION - For the purpose of this clause, the expression “employment under
a cooperative society” includes the holding of any office, whether elective or otherwise, such
as that of President, Chairman, Manager, Secretary, Treasurer and the like, by whatever
name called in such society.

11
 (b) the expression “date of retirement” in relation to a Government servant re-
employed after retirement, without any break, either in the same or in another post under the
Government or in any other equivalent post under the Central or another State Government,
means the date on which such Government servant finally ceases to be so re-employed in
Government service.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Permission to negotiate for commercial employment while in service should not be
given unless there are special reasons for doing so.

2. Employment with black listed firm shall not be considered

The fact that a firm is black listed by Government will be one of the factors which will
render the employment to be considered as not being of a thoroughly reputable kind.

3. Employment with University not commercial

Since a University is not engaged in “trading, commerce, industrial or professional
business”, employment therewith is not commercial employment within the meaning of Rule
9 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996 and as such no permission for such employment is
necessary.

4. Intimation required in case of retired gazetted officers other than State
Service Officers accepting commercial employment

It has been decided by the Government that while gazetted officers other than State
Service Officers may not be required to take prior permission of the Government for
accepting commercial employment within two years of retirement, they should give an
intimation to the Cadre Controlling Authority/Department in/or under which they served last
before their retirement, if they take up any commercial employment, as defined in sub rule
(8) of Rule 9 of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, within two years of
their retirement. While sending the intimation, they should also specify whether or not they
have had any official dealing while in Government service, with the private employer, with
whom they are taking up commercial employment.

10. Restriction on practice in Sales Tax and other cases after retirement

(1) No pensioner who, while in service, belonged to the Rajasthan Commercial
Taxes Service, or who, having been a member of any other State Service retired from a post
under the Department of Finance, shall set up practice before the expiry of two years from
the date of his retirement -

(a) in any area which was within the local limit of his jurisdiction during the last
three years immediately before his retirement;

(b) in areas other than those referred to in clause (a) without the previous sanction
of the Governor;

(2) No pension shall be payable to such pensioner who sets up practice in
contravention of sub rule (1) in respect of any period for which he has set up practice or
such longer period as the Government may direct.

EXPLANATION - For the purposes of this rule, -

(i) the expression “practice” means practice, either independently or as a partner of a
firm or a consultant or adviser in matters relating to Sales Tax or Central Sales Tax or
Entertainment Tax, or as representative of assesses in proceedings under the enactment
relating to the levy of such tax or duty;

12
 (ii) the expression “date of retirement” shall have the same meaning as in sub rule
(8) (b) of Rule 9.

11. Employment after retirement under a Government outside India

If a pensioner, who immediately before his retirement was a member of a State
Service, wishes to accept any employment under any Government outside India, he shall
obtain the previous permission of the Government for such acceptance, and no pension
shall be payable to a pensioner who accepts such an employment without proper
permission in respect of any period for which he is so employed or such longer period as the
Government may direct:

Provided that a Government servant who was permitted by the Government to take
up a particular form of employment under any Government outside India during his leave
preparatory to retirement shall not be required to obtain subsequent permission for his
continuance in such employment after retirement.

EXPLANATION - For the purposes of this rule, the expression “employment under
any Government outside India” includes employment under a local authority or corporation
or any other institution or organisation which functions under the supervision or control of a
Government outside India, or an employment, under an International Organisation of which
the Government of India is not a member.

13
 CHAPTER Il

QUALIFYING SERVICE

12. Commencement of qualifying service

(a) Except for compensation gratuity, a Government servant's service does not
qualify till he has completed eighteen years of age.

(b) Subject to the provisions of these rules, the qualifying service of a Government
servant shall commence from the date he takes over charge of the post to which he is first
appointed, either substantively or in an officiating or temporary capacity.

13. Conditions subject to which service qualifies

(1) The service of a Government servant shall not qualify unless he is appointed and
his duties and pay are regulated by the Government, or under conditions determined by the
Government.

(2) For the purposes of sub rule (1), the expression “service” means service under
the Government and paid by that Government from the Consolidated Fund but does not
include service in a non-pensionable establishment, work-charged establishment and
service in a post paid from contingencies, unless such service is treated as qualifying
service by that Government.

The fact that arrangements are made for the recovery on the part of Government, of
the whole, or part, of the cost of an establishment, or officer, does not affect the operation of
this principle, provided that the establishment or officer is appointed, controlled and paid by
the Government.

Service paid from Local Funds, Trust Funds, Fees and Commissions etc. does not
qualify.

(3) In the case of a Government servant belonging to Central Government or any
other State Government with whom the Rajasthan Government has entered into reciprocal
arrangements, who is permanently transferred to a service or post to which these rules
apply, the continuous service rendered under the Central Government or that State
Government in substantive, officiating or temporary capacity, shall qualify:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub rule shall apply to any such Government
servant who is appointed otherwise than by deputation to a service or post to which these
rules apply.

14. Government’s power to declare any service as qualifying service

Government may, however, declare that any specified kind of service or service
rendered by a Government servant shall qualify for pension subject to such conditions as
Government may think fit to impose.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. (1) The work charged employees who are absorbed/appointed to regular posts
under Government from time to time may be allowed to exercise option to elect either to
continue to contribute towards Contributory Provident Fund or to opt for pensionary benefits
under Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules. On their electing to opt for pension rules,
the period of service rendered by them as work charged employees while drawing pay in the
pay scale prescribed for them excluding the period of Muster Roll (daily wages/casual
labour) before appointment/absorption on regular post shall qualify for pension irrespective

14
 of whether contribution to the Contributory Provident Fund, was made from their salary or
not, and further irrespective of their date of absorption in Government service subject to the
conditions laid down in para (2) below.

(2) In the case of a Government servant who opts for pension under the Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, the following procedure shall be followed :-

(a) The C.P.F. account of the concerned work charged employee shall be
completed and closed; and

(i) | the amount of subscription together with interest thereon standing to the
credit of such Government servant in his Contributory Provident Fund on
the date of option shall be transferred to his credit in the General
Provident Fund.

(ii) | the amount of contribution by the State Government together with interest
thereon standing to his credit in the Fund on the above date shall be
credited to the General Revenues.

(b) The employee shall, in exchange, be entitled to count towards pension the
service rendered by him as a work charged employee prior to such date, as if
such service has been rendered in a pensionable establishment under the
Government.

(3) The option has to be exercised in writing in Form 4 within a period of two months
from the date of absorption/appointment to regular posts. Option once exercised shall be
final. Those who do not exercise option within the aforesaid time limit shall be deemed to
have opted for pension rules in lieu of the Contributory Provident Fund benefits. It should be
noted that it is not sufficient for a Government servant to exercise option within the specified
time but also to ensure that it reaches the prescribed authority within the time and that he
obtains acknowledgement thereof. The option given by the Government servant may be
pasted in the service book and an attested true copy of it be placed in his personal file. The
option shall be communicated to the Head of Office. The option when received from a
Government servant shall be countersigned by the authority which receives it.

(4) In the case of Government servants who were required to contribute under
Contributory Provident Fund Rules as applicable to them prior to their absorption but who
did not contribute during any period or spell after coming into force of the respective relevant
Work Charged Employees Contributory Provident Fund Rules for one reason or another,
they may be allowed to contribute for that period so that any intervening period may also be
counted for pension.

(5) These orders shall also apply to work charged employees, governed by the work-
charged Service Rules, 1964 (now repealed) or Standing orders issued by the respective
departments and who have rendered at least ten years qualifying service and were drawing
pay in pay scales applicable to them may be deemed to have been made regular for the
purpose of grant of pension.

2. The services rendered by the employees serving in municipal schools or grant in
aid private educational institutions or other voluntary bodies or institutions including water
supply schemes managed by the municipalities or Panchayat Raj institutions prior to their
take over by the Government may be counted for the purpose of pension under the
Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, subject to the fulfillment of the following
conditions :-

15
 (i) |The amount of contribution by the employer together with interest thereon
standing to his credit in the Contributory Provident Fund account in the
institution on the date of his transfer under Government shall be credited to the
General Revenues of the State Government.

(ii) 116 amount of subscription together with interest thereon standing to the credit
of the employee in his Contributory Provident Fund account on the date of
taking over of the institution will be transferred to his credit in a General
Provident Fund account.

(iii) The employee shall, in exchange, be entitled to count towards pension the
service rendered by him in the aforesaid institutions prior to the date of taking
over as if such service has been rendered in a pensionable establishment
under the Government provided that the benefit of pensionable service shall
accrue only in respect of the period or periods of service rendered in the
institutions during which he subscribed to the Contributory Provident Fund.

73 The undersigned is directed to invite attention towards provisions contained in
Government of Rajasthan's Decision No.1 appearing below Rule 14 of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, under which on absorption/appointment of work-charged
employees on regular post, the period of service rendered by them as work-charged
employees while drawing pay in the pay scales prescribed for them excluding the period of
Muster-Roll service (daily wages/casual labour) is counted as service qualifying for pension,
on their electing to opt for pension rules in lieu of Contributory Provident Fund or they are
deemed to have opted for pension rules.

In pursuance of the judgements passed by the Hon'ble High Court and Supreme
Court in few cases the matter has been reconsidered and in partial modification of the
aforesaid decision the Governor has been pleased to order that on absorption/appointment
of work-charged employees on regular post the period of service rendered by them as work-
charged employees while drawing pay in the pay scales prescribed for them including
continuous period of Muster-Roll service i.e. on daily wages/casual labours be counted as
service qualifying for pension irrespective of whether deduction towards Contributory
Provident Fund was made from their salaries or not.

This order shall come into force with immediate effect. Past cases already decided
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this order shall not be reopened but
pending cases including cases pertaining to the period prior to 1.10.1996 shall be finalised
in accordance with the provisions of this order."

"4. राज्य सरकार के इन्जीनियरिंग विभागों एवं वन विभाग के कार्यप्रभारित कर्मचारियों को अर्द्धस्थाई /
स्थाई / नियमित घोषित होने के पश्चात्‌ अधिशेष घोषित करने पर दिनांक 1.1.2004 एवं इसके पश्चात्‌ राज्य सेवा में
नियमित पदों के विरूद्ध समायोजित किया गया है | इस संबंध में विभिन्‍न विभागों द्वारा यह जानकारी चाही गई थी कि ये
कर्मचारी नवीन अंशदायी पेंशन योजना के सदस्य होंगे अथवा राजस्थान सिविल सेवा (पेंशन) नियम 1996 के तहत
शामिल होंगे।

इस संबंध में यह स्पष्ट किया जाता है कि ऐसे कार्यप्रभारित कर्मचारी जो अधिशेष घोषित होने से पूर्व
अर्द्धस्थाई,/ स्थाई / नियमित थे एवं वे राज्य सरकार के विभिन्‍न विभागों में नियमित पदों विरूद्ध सक्षम प्राधिकारी द्वारा
समायोजित किये गये थे तो वे सभी कर्मचारी राजस्थान सिविल सेवा (पेंशन) नियम 1996 के तहत ही शासित होंगे |”

1. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.1(12)FD(Rules)/96 dated 6.3.1997.
2. Inserted vide FD Circular No.F.1(12)FD(Rules)/96 dated 20.9.2006.

16
 15. Counting of Service as Apprentice
Service as an apprentice shall not qualify for the purpose of pension.
16. Counting of service on probation

The service rendered as a probationer or on probation shall qualify for the purpose of
pension.

17. Counting of service on contract

Service of an establishment paid from a Contract Establishment Allowance, with the
detailed distribution of which the Government does not interfere, does not qualify whether
such contract allowance is a fixed amount or consists of fees.

18. Counting of pre-retirement civil service in the case of re-employed
Government servants

(1) A Government servant who, having retired on compensation pension or invalid
pension or compensation gratuity or invalid gratuity, is re-employed and appointed
substantively to a service or post to which these rules apply, may exercise option either -

(a) to continue to draw the pension or retain the gratuity sanctioned for his earlier

service, in which case his former service shall not count as qualifying service,
or

(b) 10 cease to draw his pension and refund -
(i) | the pension already drawn,
(ii) the value received for the commutation of a part of pension, and
(iii) the amount of retirement gratuity including service gratuity, if any,
and count the previous service as qualifying service:
Provided that -

(i) | the pension drawn prior to the date of re-employment shall not be required to
be refunded,

(ii) | the element of pension which was ignored for fixation of his pay including the
element of pension which was not taken into account for fixation of pay shall be
refunded by him,

(iii) the element of commuted part of pension, if any, which was taken in to account
for fixation of his pay shall be set off against the amount of retirement gratuity
and the commuted value of pension and the balance, if any, shall be refunded
by him.

EXPLANATION - In this clause, the expression ‘which was taken into account’
means the amount of pension by which pay of the Government servant was reduced on
initial re-employment, and the expression ‘which was not taken into account’ shall be
construed accordingly.

(2) (a) The authority issuing the order of substantive appointment to a service or
post as is referred to in sub rule (1) shall along with such order require in
writing the Government servant to exercise the option under that sub rule
within three months of the date of issue of such order, or if he is on leave
on that day, within three months of his return from leave, whichever is
later and also bring to his notice the provisions of clause (b).

(b) If no option is exercised within the period referred to in clause (a), the
Government servant shall be deemed to have opted for clause (a) of sub
rule (1).

17
 (3) In the case of a Government servant who opts for clause (a) of sub rule (1), the
pension or gratuity admissible for his subsequent service is subject to the limitation, that
service gratuity, or the capital value of pension and retirement gratuity, if any, shall not be
greater than the difference between the value of pension and retirement gratuity, if any, that
would be admissible at the time of the Government servant's final retirement if the two
periods of service were combined and the value of retirement benefits already granted to
him for the previous service.

NOTE

The capital value of pension shall be calculated in accordance with the table
prescribed by the Government under the Rajasthan Civil Services Pension (Commutation)
Rules applicable at the time of second or final retirement.

(4) (a) A Government servant who opts for clause (b) of sub rule (1) shall be
required to refund the gratuity received in respect of his earlier service, in monthly
instalments not exceeding thirty six in number, the first instalment beginning from the month
following the month in which he exercised the option.

(b) The right to count previous service as qualifying service shall not revive until the
whole amount has been refunded.

(5) In the case of a Government servant, who, having elected to refund the gratuity,
dies before the entire amount is refunded, the amount of un-refunded gratuity shall be
adjusted against the death gratuity which may become payable to his family.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION
The provisions of above rule shall also be applicable in case of :-
(i) | Persons appointed as probationers against permanent posts,

(ii) Persons recruited through Rajasthan Public Service Commission for
appointment on temporary posts within their purview,

(iii) Persons recruited strictly in accordance with Service Rules in case of
temporary posts outside the purview of the Rajasthan Public Service
Commission.

Action under sub rule (2) (a) shall be taken by the appointing authority
simultaneously with the appointment order.

19. Counting of military service rendered before civil employment

(1) (i) A Government servant who is re-employed in a civil service or post before
attaining the age of superannuation and who, before such re-employment had rendered
military service after the age of eighteen years which is pensionable under military rules but
which terminates before a pension has been earned in respect of it, may count such
previous military service as qualifying service, at his option to be exercised within three
months of date of joining civil service or post, subject to the condition that-

(a) he shall be required to refund the bonus and/or gratuity received in respect of
his earlier military service, in monthly instalments not exceeding thirty six in
number, alongwith interest @ 6 % per annum from the date of his joining
service under the State Government the first instalment beginning from the
month in which he exercised the option.

(b) the right to count previous service as qualifying service shall not revive until the
whole amount has been refunded.

18
 (ii) In the case of a Government servant, who, having elected to refund the
bonus and/or gratuity, dies before the entire amount is refunded, the un-
refunded amount of bonus and/or gratuity shall be adjusted against the
death gratuity which may become payable to the family.

(iii) When an order is passed under this rule allowing previous military service
to count as part of the service qualifying for civil pension, the order shall
be deemed to include the condonation of interruption in service, if any, in
the military service and between the military and civil service provided it
does not exceed two years.

(2) Service pensionable under military rules which does not terminate before a
pension has been earned in respect of it shall not be allowed to count for pension under
Civil Rules.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

1. The concerned appointing authority would be competent to allow counting of
previous military service subject to the conditions laid down in rule 19.

2. The Governor is pleased to order that the provisions of Rule 19 of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 shall also be applicable to a Government servant who
was initialy re-eemployed as work-charged employee and subsequently taken/appointed in
civil service or post and who, before such re-employment, had rendered military service
which is pensionable under military rules, but which terminated before a pension has been
earned in respect of it.

Such existing Government servants shall be required to exercise their option for
counting of military service with civil service, as envisaged in the aforesaid rules, within a
period of three months from the date of publication of this order in the Rajasthan Rajpatra.”

AUDIT INSTRUCTION

The charges on account of the pensionary liability in respect of the qualifying service
that may be added under the above order shall be debited to the Rajasthan State in
accordance with the general principles of allocation laid down in Accounts Code Volume-I.

20. Counting of periods spent on leave

(1) All leave during service for which leave salary is payable shall count as qualifying
service.

(2) Extra ordinary leave i.e. leave without pay and allowances, shall count as
qualifying service only if taken in any of the circumstances mentioned below :-

(i) | on medical certificate granted by the Authorised Medical Attendant;
(ii) | for prosecuting higher scientific and technical studies;

(iii) due to the inability of the Government servant concerned to join or rejoin duty
due to civil commotion or a natural calamity.

1... Inserted vide FD order No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)/97 dated 24.1.2001

19
 GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

Every order for grant of extra ordinary leave to a Government servant should specify
the purpose for which leave has been taken and as to whether the period would qualify for
pension under this rule. An entry to this effect should also be made in the Service Book,
alongwith the issue of the order.

21. Counting of periods spent on training

(1) The Government may, by order, decide whether the time spent by a Government
servant (including a person in training for, but not actually appointed to Government service)
under training shall count as qualifying service.

(2) When a Government servant is deputed out of India on duty, the whole period of
his absence from India counts. When a Government servant on leave out of India is
employed or is detained after termination of his leave on duty, the period of such
employment or detention counts.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

Training period of the following category of employees who are required to undergo
departmental training relating to jobs before they are put on regular employment, may be
treated as qualifying service for pension, if the training is followed immediately by an
appointment. This benefit will be admissible even if the employees concerned are not given
the scale of pay of the post but only a nominal allowance during training:-

1. Patwaries of Revenue, Settlement and Irrigation Departments.

2. Rangers of Forest Department.

22. Counting of periods of suspension

The period of suspension shall count as service qualifying for pension if no specific
order otherwise has been passed by the disciplinary authority in the order of penalty. If in
the order of penalty specific order to the treatment of period of suspension regarding
counting of qualifying service for pension has been passed by the disciplinary authority
provisions of that order shall be operative for this purpose.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS
1. Need for making proper entries for counting of periods of suspension

Rule 22 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, requires that in cases other than those in
which suspension has been held to be wholly unjustified the competent authority should at
the appropriate time declare whether and to what extent the period of suspension will count
towards the qualifying service. Specific entries in this regard in the service book/records will
be taken note of at the time of reckoning qualifying service.

2. Suspension should be held wholly unjustified when the proceedings end
with minor penalty

Where departmental proceedings against a suspended employee for the imposition
of a major penalty finally end with the imposition of minor penalty, the suspension can be
said to be wholly unjustified in terms of rule 54 of R.S.R. and the period of suspension
should be counted as qualifying service by passing a suitable order under rule 54 of
Rajasthan Service Rules.

20
 23. Forfeiture of service on dismissal or removal

Dismissal or removal of a Government servant from a service or post entails
forfeiture of his past service.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

The termination of service under the terms of appointment for failure to pass a
prescribed examination will not amount to dismissal or removal within the meaning of this
rule. A Government servant whose services are terminated for failure to pass a prescribed
examination and who is appointed to another post without any break, will count his previous
service towards pension.

24. Counting of past service on reinstatement

(1) A Government servant who is dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired from
service, but is reinstated on appeal or review, is entitled to count his past service as
qualifying service.

(2) The period of interruption in service between the date of dismissal, removal or
compulsory retirement, as the case may be, and the date of reinstatement, and the period of
suspension, if any, shall not count as qualifying service unless regularised as duty or leave
by a specific order of the authority which passed the order of reinstatement.

25, Forfeiture of service on resignation
(1) Resignation from a service or a post, entails forfeiture of past service.

(2) A resignation shall not entail forfeiture of past service if it has been submitted to
take up, with proper permission, another appointment, whether temporary or permanent,
under the Government where service qualifies.

(3) Interruption in service in a case falling under sub-rule (2), due to the two
appointments being at different stations, not exceeding the joining time admissible under the
rules of transfer, shall be covered by grant of leave of any kind due to the Government
servant on the date of relief or by formal condonation to the extent to which the period is not
covered by leave due to him.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Release of Government servants for appointment in Public Sector
Enterprises etc.

A Government servant who has been selected for a post in a Public Sector
Enterprise/Autonomous Body or other institutions as are referred to in rule 33 and Appendix
IX may be released only after obtaining and accepting his resignation from the Government
service. Resignation from Government service with a view to secure employment in any of
those organisations with proper permission will not entail forfeiture of the service for the
purpose of retirement/terminal benefits. In such cases, the Government servant concerned
shall be deemed to have retired from service from the date of such resignation and shall be
eligible to receive all retirement/terminal benefits as are admissible under the rules 33, 34
and Appendix IX.

21
 2. Procedure to be followed when benefit of past service is allowed

Under rule 25 (2) of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, resignation of
an appointment to take up, with proper permission, another appointment, whether
permanent or temporary, service in which counts in full or in part, is not resignation from
public service. In such cases, the order accepting the resignation should clearly indicate that
the employee is resigning to join another appointment with proper permission and that the
benefits under Rule 25 (2) will be admissible to him. The contents of the above order should
also be noted in the service books of the individuals concerned under proper attestation.
The issue of any separate sanction is not necessary.

26. Effect of interruption in service

(1) An interruption in the service of a Government servant entails forfeiture of his
past service, except in the following cases :-

(a) authorised leave of absence;

(b) unauthorised absence in continuation of authorised leave of absence so long
as the post of absentee is not filled substantively;

(c) suspension, where it is immediately followed by reinstatement, whether in the
same or a different post, or where the Government servant dies or is
permitted to retire or is retired on attaining the age of compulsory retirement
while under suspension;

(d) transfer to non-qualifying service in an establishment under the control of the
Government if such transfer has been ordered by a competent authority in
the public interest;

(e) joining time while on transfer from one post to another;

(f) abolition of office or loss of appointment owing to the reduction of
establishment.

NOTES

1. A Government servant who is discharged on the abolition of an appointment
is entitled to the benefit of clause (f) of this rule even though the appointment
abolished may not have been that which he held or even one of the particular
establishment on which he was actually serving.

2. A period of overstayal of leave does not count for pension.

3) Previous service of a Government servant would be forfeited if the new post
to which he is transferred was not created until he joined it; in that case
condonation under rule 27 would be required.

4. Joining time does not qualify if no allowances are paid during that period.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the appointing authority

may, by order, commute retrospectively the periods of absence without leave as
extraordinary leave.

22
 GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Treatment of wilful absence from duty.

In accordance with Government of Rajasthan’s Decision No.1 below Rule 86 of
Rajasthan Service Rules, wilful absence from duty, even though not covered by grant of
leave does not entail loss of lien. The period of absence not covered by grant of leave shall
have to be treated as “dies non” for all purposes, viz., increment, leave and pension. Such
absence without leave where it stands singly and not in continuation of any authorised leave
of absence will constitute an interruption of service for the purpose of pension and unless
the pension sanctioning authority exercises its powers under rule 26 (2) of R.C.S. (Pension)
Rules to treat the period as extra ordinary leave, the entire past service will stand forfeited.

2. The power under this rule to commute retrospectively periods of absence without
leave into extra ordinary leave is absolute, the purpose of the rule being merely to obviate
for purposes of pension, the forfeiture of past service.

27. Condonation of interruption in service.

(1) (a) In the absence of a specific indication to the contrary in the service book,
an interruption between two spells of civil service rendered by a
Government servant under Government shall be treated as automatically
condoned and the pre interruption service treated as qualifying service.

Provided that —

(i) in no case the total break beyond the period of two years shall be
condoned.

(ii) in each case of interruption in service the appointing authority shall issue
show cause notice of 15 days duration to the respective employee and
take into consideration his representation, if any. Thereafter, the
appointing authority shall take decision on merit of the case whether the
period of service rendered prior to interruption shall qualify for pension or
not. In case the appointing authority decides that the period of service
prior to the interruption shall not be counted as qualifying service for
pension, then he shall be required to make an entry in the service book.
Otherwise the period of service rendered prior to interruption shall be
automatically counted as service qualifying for pension.

(iii) in case of participation in strike by a Government servant, the appointing
authority shall issue show cause notice of 15 days to the respective
employee. If after considering the representation or otherwise it is proved
that the respective employee has actually participated in the strike, the
entry for the period of strike shall he made in Service Book of the
employee.”

(b) Nothing in clause (a) shall apply to interruption caused by resignation,
dismissal or removal from service or for participation in a strike.

(c) The period of interruption referred to in clause (a) shall not count as
qualifying service.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained under sub rule (1), the Government may
condone interruption in service of a Government servant, upon such conditions as it may
think fit in each case to impose, in such a manner as may appear to it to be just and
equitable.

1. Inserted vide FD Notification No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)/97 dated 28.10.2002 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.

23
 NOTES

1. The powers of condonation under this rule carry with them the power of
reviving service rendered prior to interruptions but forfeited.

2. In case past service is allowed to be counted for pension, the Government
servant will be required to refund the amount of retirement benefits obtained together with
interest @ 12% per annum at simple rates from the date of receipt of such benefits till the
date on which the refund is made.

13, Deleted
GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

The Government have delegated full powers to condone the interruption in service
either between two spells of permanent service or between permanent/temporary or two
spells of temporary services, caused on account of resignation, to the Administrative
Departments of the Government, subject to the following conditions :-

(i) The interruption should have been caused by reasons beyond the control of
the Government servant concerned,

(ii) Service preceding the interruption should not be less than 5 years duration
and in cases where there are two or more interruptions the total service
pensionary benefits in respect of which will be lost if the interruptions are not
condoned, should not be less than five years; and

(iii) The interruption should not be more than one year’s duration. In case where
there are two or more interruptions, the total of the periods of all interruptions
that are condoned should not exceed one year.

28. Period of deputation to United Nations and other organisations

A Government servant deputed on foreign service, for a period of five years or more,
to the United Nations’ Secretariat or other United Nations’ Bodies, the International
Monetary Fund, the International Bank of Reconstruction and Development, or the Asian
Development Bank or the Commonwealth Secretariat, may at his option -

(a) pay the pension contributions in respect of his foreign service and count such
service as qualifying for pension under these rules; or

(b) avail of the retirement benefits admissible under the rules of the aforesaid
organisations and not count such service as qualifying for pension under
these rules :

Provided that where a Government servant opts for clause (b), retirement benefits
shall be payable to him in India in rupees from such date and in such manner as the
Government may, by order, specify:

1. The existing 'Note 3' deleted as under vide FD Notification No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)97 dated 28.10.2002 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.

"3. In case of a Government servant in teaching side in school/college who on his
subsequent re-appointment to the same post is entitled to draw vacation salary in
accordance with provisions contained in para 1 of Government of Rajasthan Decision No.1
below Rule 97 of Rajasthan Service Rules, the condonation of interruption between his
temporary service and permanent/temporary service for the purpose of pension shall be
covered in sub rule 1 (a) provided that the break is caused due to delay in issue of
appointment orders and provided further that the break does not exceed one month."

24
 Provided further that pension contributions, if any, paid by the Government servant,
shall be refunded to him.

29. Verification of qualifying service after 25 years service, or 5 years before
retirement

(1) On a Government servant completing twenty-five years of service or on his being
left with five years of service before the date of retirement, whichever is earlier, the Head of
Office, in consultation with the senior most member of the Rajasthan Accounts Service
posted in the Department, shall, in accordance with the rules for the time being in force,
verify the service rendered by such a Government servant, determine the qualifying service
and communicate to him, in Form 24 the period of qualifying service so determined.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), where a Government servant
is transferred to another department from a temporary department or on account of the
closure of the department he had been previously serving or because the post he held had
been declared surplus, the verification of his service may be done whenever such event
occurs.

(3) The verification done under sub-rule (1) and (2) shall be subject to the final
verification of qualifying service which shall be made at the time of the retirement of the
Government servant.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

Strict compliance of the requirements of sub-rule (1)

Sub rule (1) of Rule 29 of the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, provides that on a
Government servant completing twenty five years of service, or on his being left with five
years of service before the date of retirement, whichever is earlier, the Head of Office in
consultation with the senior most member of the Rajasthan Accounts Service, shall, in
accordance with the rules for the time being in force, verify the service rendered by such a
Government servant, determine the qualifying service and communicate to him, in the
prescribed Form 24, the period of qualifying service so determined.

These provisions have statutory force, and therefore the qualifying service should
invariably be communicated to the Government servant as required under the rules. All
Heads of Departments are required to ensure its strict compliance by the Heads of Offices. If
any Head of Office does not comply with the requirements of the aforesaid rule, the Head of
Office will be held personally accountable.

25
 CHAPTER III

CLASSES OF PENSIONS AND CONDITIONS
GOVERNING THEIR GRANT

30. Superannuation Pension

A superannuation pension shall be granted to a Government servant who is retired
on his attaining the age of compulsory retirement under rule "56" of Rajasthan Service
Rules.

NOTE

Government pleaders are not subject to the operation of this rule.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS
1. No specific orders are necessary for retirement on due date.-

(1) A question has been raised whether the retirement of a Government servant is
automatic on the date on which he attains the age of compulsory retirement or some specific
order by a competent authority is necessary specifying the date on which he should retire.

(2) The rules regulating the age of superannuation or the terms and conditions of
service provide for the compulsory retirement of a Government servant on his attaining a
specific age or completion of a specified period of service. In all such cases retirement is
automatic and in the absence of specific orders to the contrary by the competent authority a
Government servant is deemed to have retired on the due date. It is, however, desirable that
the administrative authorities concerned ensure that the Government servants under their
control are served with a formal order of retirement. The date of compulsory retirement of a
Government servant is known in advance and there should be no question of failure to make
arrangements for his relief sufficiently in advance and complete any formalities required in
that behalf. For this purpose, the authorities concerned should maintain a proper record
showing on the 1st of January of every year the names of persons due to retire during the
next five years, and take such appropriate action as may be necessary for issue of formal
orders of retirement one year in advance of the due dates. This is specially necessary
because some low paid employees themselves genuinely forget what is their date of
superannuation.

(3) At the same time, a Government servant cannot take advantage of the non
receipt of formal orders regarding his relief, etc., to say that he has been granted an
extension of service. If the Government servant desires to take any leave preparatory to
retirement he will naturally apply for it in good time. If not, it is his responsibility also that he
should bring the fact that he is attaining the age of superannuation after which he has to
retire, to the notice of the Head of the Office in which he is serving or if he himself is the
head of office to that of his immediate superior. Unless he receives specific orders that he
should continue in service he should make over charge on the due date to the head of the
office (or such officer as may be nominated by the latter), or if he is himself the Head of the
Office to the next senior most officer in the office who would normally be placed in charge of
the office in his absence.

(4) If any Government servant continues on his post after attaining the age of
superannuation contrary to the above instructions, payment of any dues to him for the
period he so remains will not be a liability of the State Government.

1. The existing figure "56 A" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(6)FD(Rules)97 dated 27.6.1998.

26
 2. (1) Government are as a matter of policy averse to the grant of extension of
service to superannuated Government servants save in cases of the most exceptional
nature. They consider that where due to the shortage of trained and experienced personnel,
it is deemed essential in the public interest to retain the service of a Government servant
about to be superannuated, the proper procedure would be to retire the Government servant
concerned and offer him re-employment for a limited period. Proposal for the grant of
extension of service should, therefore, be made only in cases where the expedient of re-
employment after retirement, is, for some exceptional and unavoidable reasons (to be
stated) not found practicable.

(2) All cases of proposed extension or re-employment should be referred to the
Department of Personnel as provided in rule 151. The reference should be made at least
three months in advance of the crucial date.

3. In the case of a Government servant for whom an order of extension of service or
re-employment for a specified period has actually been brought into effect, the service
cannot, except on disciplinary grounds, be terminated prematurely before the expiry of the
specified period unless he has been expressly told that his service may be terminated at any
time during the period by giving notice or otherwise.

AUDIT INSTRUCTION

When a Government servant is required to retire, revert, or cease to be on leave on
attaining a specified age, the day on which he attains that age is reckoned as a non-working
day and the Government servant must retire, revert, or cease to be on leave (as the case
may be) with effect from and including that day.

ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION

Relinquishment of charge on a holiday. - A question has been raised regarding the
procedure to be followed for relinquishment of charge of office in the case of a retiring
Government servant when the day on which he is due to retire happens to be a closed
holiday. Since a Government servant shall retire from service with effect from the afternoon
of the last day of the month in which his/her date of retirement falls, the retiring Government
servant should formally relinquish charge of office on the afternoon of that day itself even if it
happens to be a closed holiday.

In cases in which handing over of cash, stores, etc. is involved, these may be made
over by the retiring officer, to the next senior officer of the Department present on the close
of the previous working day. The actual relinquishment of charge of office shall be made in
the prescribed form on the last day of service for which the physical presence of the officer
in the office need not be insisted upon.

31. Combined appointments

A Government servant holding two or more separate appointments may not, save
with the express sanction of Government in the Finance Department, resign one or more of
such appointments on a pension without retiring from the public service altogether. There is
no objection to his being relieved from one or more of such appointments at any time,
without being compelled to leave the service altogether; but in such case, any pension
admissible to him for service in the office or offices from which he is relieved, will be
deferred until he finally retires.

27
 32. Retiring Pension
A retiring pension shall be granted -

(a) to a Government servant who retires, or is retired, in advance of the age of
compulsory retirement in accordance with the provisions of Rules 50 and 53
of these rules, or

(b) to a Government servant who, on being declared surplus, opts for voluntary
retirement in accordance with the provisions of Rule 52 of these rules.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

Date of effect - The orders regarding retirement on the last day of the month will not
apply to cases of premature retirement.

33 Pension on absorption in or under a corporation, company or body

A Government servant who has been permitted to be absorbed in a service or post in
or under a corporation or company wholly or substantially owned or controlled by the
Government or in or under a body controlled or financed by the Government shall, if such
absorption is declared by the Government to be in the public interest, be deemed to have
retired from service from the date of such absorption and shall be eligible to receive
retirement benefits which he may have elected or deemed to have elected, and from such
date as may be determined, in accordance with the orders of the Government applicable to
him.

(For detailed orders on permanent transfer of Government servants to above bodies,
see Appendix IX).

34. Payment of lump sum amount to persons on absorption in or under a
corporation, company or body

Where a Government servant referred to in Rule 33 elects the alternative of receiving
the retirement gratuity and a lump sum amount in lieu of pension, he shall, in addition to the
retirement gratuity, be granted:

(a) on an application made in this behalf, a lump sum amount not exceeding the
commuted value of one-third of his pension as may be admissible to him in
accordance with the provisions of Rajasthan Civil Services (Commutation)
Rules; and

(b) terminal benefits equal to the commuted value of the balance amount of
pension left after commuting one-third of pension to be worked out with
reference to the commutation tables obtaining on the date from which the
commuted value becomes payable subject to the condition that the
Government servant surrenders his right of drawing two-thirds of his pension.

35. Invalid Pension

(1) Invalid pension may be granted if a Government servant retires from the service
on account of any bodily or mental infirmity which permanently incapacitates him for the
service, or for the particular branch of it to which he belongs.

(2) A Government servant applying for an invalid pension shall submit a medical
certificate of incapacity from the following medical authority, namely :-

28
 (a) A Medical Board in the case of Gazetted Government servant and of a non
gazetted Government servant whose pay, as defined in Rule 7(24) of R.S.R.,
exceeds "eight thousand” rupees per mensem.

(b) Civil Surgeon or a District Medical Officer or Medical Officer or equivalent
status in other cases.

Note: A lady doctor shall be included as a member of the Medical Board when a
woman candidate is to be examined.

(3) The form of the Medical Certificate to be granted by the medical authority
specified in sub rule (2) shall be as in Form 23.

(4) Where the medical authority referred to in sub rule (2) has declared a
Government servant fit for further service of less laborious character than that which he had
been doing, he should, provided he is willing to be so employed, be employed on a lower
post and if there be no means of employing him even on a lower post, he may be admitted
to invalid pension.

(5) No medical certificate of incapacity for service may be granted unless the
applicant produces a letter to show that the Head of his Office or Department is aware of his
intention to appear before the Medical Officer. The Medical Officer shall also be supplied by
the Head of Office or Department in which the applicant is employed with a statement of
what appears from the official records to be the applicant's age. Where the applicant has a
service book, the age therein recorded should be reported.

NOTE

The Government has issued the Rajasthan Civil Services (Medical Examination)
Rules, 1996 for medical examination of Government servants suffering from contagious
diseases or physical or mental disability interfering with the efficient discharge of their
duties; and other connected matters.

"CLARIFICATION

Under Rule 35, 38 and 42 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 a
Government servant with less than 10 years of qualifying service can be retired on invalid
pension, compensation pension and compulsory retirement pension respectively.

Under Rule 3(p) of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 ‘Pension’
includes gratuity except when the term pension is used in contradistinction to gratuity and
under Rule 3(k)(i) ‘Gratuity’ includes service gratuity.

A doubt has been raised regarding the applicability of provisions of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 whether a Government servant who is retired under Rule
35, 38 and 42 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 with less then 10 years of
qualifying service is entitled to pension or service gratuity.

In this regard the relevant provisions as contained in Rule 122(3)(b) of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 are reproduced below: -

“If the employee eligible for disability pension under these Rules is invalided/boarded

out from service before putting in ten years service, he does not get any invalid

pension but gets only service gratuity under the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.”

1. The existing words "two thousand and two hundred” substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)97 dated
20.5.1999 w.ef. 1.10.1996.
2. Inserted vide FD Clarification No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/97 dated 23.03.2007

29
 Accordingly it is clarified that in any kind of retirement with less than 10 years of
qualifying service only service gratuity shall be admissible under Rule 54(1) of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 and in such cases on the death of a retired
Government servant, no family pension shall be payable to the family of the deceased
retired Government servant under provisions contained in Rule 61(b) of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.”

36. Special precaution in the Police

District Superintendents of Police should be on their guard against endeavours to
retire on Invalid Pension by Government servants who are capable of serving longer.

37. Restriction

(1) A Government servant discharged on other grounds has no claim to Invalid
Pension, even though he can provide medical evidence of incapacity for service.

(2) If the incapacity is directly due to irregular or intemperate habits, no pension can
be granted. If it has not been directly caused by such habits, but has been accelerated or
aggravated by them, it will be for the appointing authority to decide what reduction should be
made on this account.

NOTE

1. Unsoundness of mind caused by drug habit is a sufficient cause for invaliding a
Government servant.

2. The expression “irregular or intemperate habits” occurring in this rule refers to
incapacity on account of disease resulting from immoral habits. Cases where incapacity
occurs due to other cases e.g. work at irregular hours due to exigencies of service and not
due to own volition do not come under the purview of this rule.

38. Compensation Pension

(1) If a Government servant is selected for discharge owing to the abolition of his
permanent post, he shall, unless he is appointed to another post the conditions of which are
deemed by the authority competent to discharge him to be at least equal of those of his
own, have the option -

(a) of taking any compensation pension or gratuity to which he may be entitled for
the service he had rendered, or

(b) of accepting another appointment on such pay as may be offered and
continuing to count his previous service for pension.

(2) (a) Notice of at least three months shall be given to a Government servant in
permanent employment before his services are dispensed with on the
abolition of his permanent post.

(b) Where notice of at least three months is not given and the Government
servant has not been provided with other employment on the date on which
his services are dispensed with, the authority competent to dispense with
his services may sanction the payment of a sum not exceeding the pay and
allowances for the period by which the notice actually given to him falls
short of three months.

(c) No compensation pension shall be payable for the period in respect of
which he receives his pay and allowances in lieu of notice.

30
 (3) In case a Government servant is granted pay and allowances for the period by
which the notice given to him falls short of three months and he is re-employed before the
expiry of the period for which he has received pay and allowances he shall refund the pay
and allowances so received for the period following his re-employment.

(4) If a Government servant who is entitled to compensation pension accepts instead
another appointment under the Government and subsequently becomes entitled to receive a
pension of any class, the amount of such pension shall not be less than the compensation
pension which he could have claimed if he had not accepted the appointment.

NOTES

1. If a Government servant is transferred to a non-qualifying appointment in the
interest of public service and under the orders of a competent authority, he is entitled to a
compensation pension if discharged on abolition of that non-qualifying appointment.

2. “Pay and allowances” in this rule means the pay and allowances or leave
allowances (or partly the one, partly the other) which the Government servant would be
receiving during the period in question had the notice not been given to him.

3. If no pay in lieu of discharge is paid, the pension should take effect from the date
of discharge.

4. A permanent Government servant served with notice of discharge shall suffer no
reduction in his total emoluments for three months counting from the date of the notice.

5. The pay and allowances paid in lieu of notice on abolition of an appointment
should be charged to the particular department to which the pay of the appointment was
debited before its abolition.

6. The term “Pension” as used in sub rule (4) of this rule includes gratuity.
GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S INSTRUCTION

Rule 38 (1) (b) of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules provides that when a
Government servant is selected for being absorbed on a lower post owing to the abolition of
the post held by him, the employee should be intimated the pay being offered to him on his
appointment to the new post as required by clause (b) of the said Rule. Instead of intimating
the pay offered, the Government is moved for protection of pay the employee was last
drawing while holding the permanent post. It is to state that when a post is abolished, the
permanent incumbent should as far as possible be absorbed on an equivalent post. On
appointment to an equivalent post, his pay should be fixed on the principles laid down under
Rule 26(a) (ii) of the Rajasthan Service Rules.

In case where it is not possible to absorb an employee on an equivalent post, the
employee should be given two options as mentioned in the said Rule namely (i) taking the
compensation pension or gratuity to which he is entitled for the service already rendered or
(ii) accepting another appointment on such pay as may be offered. In regard to the pay to be
offered on the new post, since the employee does not retain any substantive pay on
abolition of his permanent post, he will be treated a fresh employee for the purpose of initial
fixation in the new post. The Government, can, however, fix his pay at a stage higher than
the minimum of the pay scale but not exceeding the last pay drawn by the employee. This
pay, however, would be further limited to the maximum of the scale of the new post to which
he is appointed.

31
 CLARIFICATION

Under Rule 35, 38 and 42 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 a
Government servant with less than 10 years of qualifying service can be retired on invalid
pension, compensation pension and compulsory retirement pension respectively.

Under Rule 3(p) of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 ‘Pension’
includes gratuity except when the term pension is used in contradistinction to gratuity and
under Rule 3(k)(i) ‘Gratuity’ includes service gratuity.

A doubt has been raised regarding the applicability of provisions of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 whether a Government servant who is retired under Rule
35, 38 and 42 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 with less then 10 years of
qualifying service is entitled to pension or service gratuity.

In this regard the relevant provisions as contained in Rule 122(3)(b) of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 are reproduced below: -

“If the employee eligible for disability pension under these Rules is invalided/boarded

out from service before putting in ten years service, he does not get any invalid

pension but gets only service gratuity under the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.”

Accordingly it is clarified that in any kind of retirement with less than 10 years of
qualifying service only service gratuity shall be admissible under Rule 54(1) of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 and in such cases on the death of a retired
Government servant, no family pension shall be payable to the family of the deceased
retired Government servant under provisions contained in Rule 61(b) of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.”

39. Discharge to make room for better qualified person will not be treated as
abolition

The discharge of one Government servant to make room for another better qualified
is not the abolition of an appointment within the meaning of Rule 38.

40. Non-admissibility of Pension on discharge after completion of specified term
of service

No pension is admissible to a Government servant for the loss of an appointment on
discharge after the completion of the specified term of service.

41. Discharge within the period of contract

Whenever it is found necessary to determine the service of an employee serving
under a contract within the period of his agreement, a specific intimation of the
determination of the agreement and of the grounds on which it has been determined shall
be furnished to the employee in writing.

42. Compulsory retirement pension

(1) A Government servant compulsorily retired from service as a penalty may be
granted, by the authority competent to impose such penalty, pension or gratuity or both at a
rate not less than two thirds and not more than full compensation pension or gratuity or both
admissible to him on the date of compulsory retirement.

1. Inserted vide FD Clarification No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/97 dated 23.03.2007

32
 (2) Whenever in the case of a Government servant, the Governor passes an order
(whether original, appellate or in exercise of powers of review) awarding a pension less than
the full compensation pension admissible under these rules, the Rajasthan Public Service
Commission shall be consulted before such order is passed.

EXPLANATION - In this sub rule, the expression “pension” includes gratuity.

(3) A pension granted or awarded under sub rule (1) or, as the case may be, under
sub rule (2), shall not be less than the amount of “Rupees one thousand two hundred
seventy five per mensem."

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

Guiding principles for reduction of pensionary benefits under rule 42.

Rule 42 prescribes the limit for retirement benefits which would be admissible to a
Government servant on whom the penalty of compulsory retirement may be imposed. This
form of penalty has been introduced to provide for cases in which the continuance of a
Government servant in service is considered to be undesirable but the extreme penalty of
removal or dismissal, with the consequent loss of pension, is considered to be too severe.

The intention is that persons on whom the penalty of compulsory retirement is
imposed should ordinarily be granted the full compensation pension and retirement gratuity,
admissible on the date of compulsory retirement. Where, however, the circumstances of a
particular case so warrant, the authority competent to impose the penalty of compulsory
retirement may make such reduction in the pensionary benefits, within the limits prescribed,
as it may think appropriate. The reduction can be made either in the retirement gratuity or in
the pension or in both.

"CLARIFICATION

Under Rule 35, 38 and 42 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 a
Government servant with less than 10 years of qualifying service can be retired on invalid
pension, compensation pension and compulsory retirement pension respectively.

Under Rule 3(p) of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 ‘Pension’
includes gratuity except when the term pension is used in contradistinction to gratuity and
under Rule 3(k)(i) ‘Gratuity’ includes service gratuity.

A doubt has been raised regarding the applicability of provisions of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 whether a Government servant who is retired under Rule
35, 38 and 42 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 with less then 10 years of
qualifying service is entitled to pension or service gratuity.

In this regard the relevant provisions as contained in Rule 122(3)(b) of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 are reproduced below: -

“If the employee eligible for disability pension under these Rules is invalided/boarded

out from service before putting in ten years service, he does not get any invalid

pension but gets only service gratuity under the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.”

Accordingly it is clarified that in any kind of retirement with less than 10 years of
qualifying service only service gratuity shall be admissible under Rule 54(1) of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 and in such cases on the death of a retired
Government servant, no family pension shall be payable to the family of the deceased
retired Government servant under provisions contained in Rule 61(b) of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.”

1. The existing words "rupees three hundred per mensem" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated
21.3.1998 w.e.f 1.10.1996.
2. Inserted vide FD Clarification No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/97 dated 23.03.2007.

33
 43. Compassionate allowance

(1) A Government servant who is dismissed or removed from service shall forfeit his
pension and gratuity:

Provided that the authority competent to dismiss or remove him from service may, if
the case is deserving of special consideration, sanction a compassionate allowance not
exceeding two thirds of pension or gratuity or both which would have been admissible to him
if he had retired on compensation pension.

(2) A compassionate allowance sanctioned under the proviso to sub rule (1) shall not
be less than the amount of ‘Rupees one thousand two hundred seventy five per mensem."

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Guiding principles for the grant of Compassionate Allowance

It is practically impossible in view of the wide variations that naturally exist in the
circumstances attending each case, to lay down categorically precise principles that can
uniformly be applied to individual cases. The grant of compassionate allowance under this
rule is a matter entirely for Government’s discretion. In exercising this discretion, each case
has, therefore, to be considered on its merits and a conclusion has to be reached on the
question whether there are any such extenuating features in the case as would make the
punishment awarded, though it may have been necessary in the interests of Government,
unduly hard on the individual. In considering this question it has been the practice to take
into account not only the actual misconduct or course of misconduct which occasioned the
dismissal or removal of the Government servant, but also the kind of service he has
rendered. Where the course of misconduct carries with it the legitimate inference that the
Government servant's service has been dishonest, there can seldom be any good case for a
compassionate allowance. Poverty is not an essential condition precedent to the grant of
compassionate allowance, but special regard is also occasionally paid to the fact that the
Government servant has a wife and children dependent upon him, though this factor by itself
is not, except perhaps in the most exceptional circumstances, sufficient for the grant of a
compassionate allowance.

2. In order to avoid delay in the payment of compassionate allowance, the following
procedure should be adopted in cases relating to Government servants removed from
service:-

(i) On receipt of the orders of the competent authority removing a Government
servant from service for misconduct, insolvency or inefficiency, the Head of the
Office, if he proposes to recommend the grant of a compassionate allowance,
should fill in the application for pension and send to the Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, for report on the title of pension. The Head of the
Office should not wait for an application from the Government servant.

(ii) If the competent authority in issuing orders of removal states that a certain
proportion of the invalid pension be granted as compassionate allowance, no
further sanction to pension is necessary, and all that is required is that the
Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan should certify to the admissibility of
the pension on a pension application completed and signed by the Head of the
Office as provided in clause (i) above.

a. The existing words "rupees three hundred per mensem" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97
dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f 1.10.1996.

34
 AUDIT INSTRUCTIONS

A compassionate allowance is not “a pension which is certified by the Director,
Pension Department to be clearly and strictly admissible under rule” and, therefore, the
provisions of Rule 87 are not applicable to such allowance.

44. Rules regulating the Compassionate Fund

The rules regulating the grant of awards from the Compassionate Fund of
Government of Rajasthan to the family of a Government servant left in indigent
circumstances through the premature death of the person upon whom they depended for
support are embodied in Appendix V.

35
 CHAPTER IV
EMOLUMENTS

45. Emoluments

The expression “emoluments” used for the purposes of Pension, Service Gratuity
and Retirement/Death Gratuity means pay as defined in Rule 7 (24) of Rajasthan Service
Rules which a Government servant was receiving immediately before his retirement or on
the date of his death:

Provided that special pay (excluding dual charge allowance)/ Non-practising
Allowance/Non Clinical Allowance and Rural Allowance drawn by a Medical Officer shall be
treated as part of pay on the basis of average of last ten months immediately before the
date of retirement.

Provided further that the amount of Dearness Allowance admissible on basic pay at
the time of retirement/ death of a Government servant, as the case may be, shall be treated
as part of emoluments for the purpose of grant of retirement gratuity/ death gratuity."

NOTES

1. If a Government servant immediately before his retirement or death while in
service had been absent from duty on leave for which leave salary is payable or having
been suspended had been reinstated without forfeiture of service, the emoluments which he
would have drawn had he not been absent from duty or suspended shall be the emoluments
for the purposes of this rule:

Provided that any increase in pay (other than the increment referred to in Note 15)
which is not actually drawn shall not form part of his emoluments.

2. If a Government servant had been under suspension immediately before his
retirement or otherwise and the departmental or judicial proceedings have not been
concluded and final orders passed thereon, the emoluments which he drew immediately
before his being placed under suspension, shall be taken into account for the purpose of
grant of provisional pension under rule 90 of these rules.

3. The officiating pay drawn by a Government servant immediately before the date of
his/her retirement shall be taken into account for the purpose of emoluments under this rule
provided that the appointment to the higher post on an officiating basis while holding the
lower post in substantive or officiating or temporary capacity was not made in leave vacancy
or to hold charge of the higher post temporarily in addition to the duties of his own post.

Certificate on the pension papers under this note for counting officiating pay, will not
be necessary where a Government servant has been granted one of the selection scales as
provided in Finance Department Order No. F.20(1)FD(Gr.2)/92 dated 25.1.1992 as
amended from time to time.

4. The benefit of counting officiating pay under this rule shall not be allowed to a
Government servant when a person senior to him would have been posted on the higher
post unless the senior person was specifically superseded by the Government servant who
retires.

1. The existing second proviso to rule 45 substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f
1.1.1997.

"Provided further that the elements of Dearness Allowance admissible on basic pay under F.D.
Order No.F.13(1)FD(Gr.2)/86-I dated 5.10.1993 shall also be treated as part of emoluments for
the purpose of grant of retirement gratuity/ Death gratuity."

36
 5. All pension sanctioning authorities are required to ensure that the certificate
necessary under Note 3 of this rule is invariably given in the pension application form itself.
Besides, the substantive pay of a Government servant should also be indicated in the
pension application form so that in the absence of completion of the formalities under Note 3
of this Rule, the pension could be released on the basis of the substantive pay pending its
revision on receipt of the required certificate referred to above.

6. One of the main causes of delay in disposal of pension cases is non submission of
the required certificate under Note 3 alongwith the pension papers. Where a Government
servant has drawn the officiating pay for a period of one year or more immediately before his
retirement, his pension may be reckoned on the basis of his officiating pay even though the
required certificate under Note 3 has not been recorded or sent by the pension sanctioning
authority alongwith his pension papers to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan. The
Director, Pension Department would, however, while releasing pension in such cases,
simultaneously address a communication to the concerned pension sanctioning authority to
furnish the required certificate within a period of one month and would also make it clear to
the pension sanctioning authority that in the event of any overpayment of pension due to
non-submission of the certificate as required under Note 3, it will be solely his personal
responsibility and the resultant excess amount so paid, if any, would be recoverable from
him.

All pension sanctioning authorities should ensure that the certificate required under
Note 3 is invariably sent alongwith the pension papers as far as possible and where for
certain inexplicable reasons the certificate is not given in the type of cases referred to
above, the required certificate will be invariably sent within a period of one month after the
release of Pension on receipt of communication from the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan, in this behalf.

7. Where a Government servant was appointed to officiate in a leave vacancy, the
question which post should be considered as the substantive/temporary post (where some
of the cadre post carry special pay) in which the Government servant would have remained
if he had not been appointed to officiate in leave vacancy is one which can only be decided
by the competent appointing authority with reference to actual facts, irrespective of the
specified post actually held immediately before the officiating appointment and irrespective
whether the Government servant is actually allowed a lien on a particular post or on a post
in the cadre.

8. The Special Pay, if any, granted for performance of additional duties of a post in
addition to duties of his own post shall not be taken into account for the purposes of this
rule.

9. The special pay drawn on an ex-cadre post shall count as part of pay under this
rule in respect of a Government servant who while holding the ex-cadre post draws it in
addition to his cadre pay.

Provided that the appointment to the ex cadre post was not made in a leave vacancy
or to hold charge of the post temporarily in addition to the duties of own post.

10. The literacy allowance drawn by Police Constables and other staff is of the
nature of Special Pay and shall count as part of emoluments for pension and gratuity.

11. Special pay granted to a State Government servant by the Central Government
for part time service shall not count as emoluments for pension, as the liability which the
Government of India agreed to bear was limited to special pay and they do not agree to
allow the special pay to be taken into account for calculating emoluments.

37
 12. Where a Government servant immediately before his retirement or death while in
service had proceeded on leave for which leave salary is payable after having held a higher
appointment whether in an officiating or temporary capacity, the benefit of emoluments
drawn in such higher appointment shall be given only if it is certified that the Government
servant would have continued to hold the higher appointment but for his proceeding on
leave.

13. If a Government servant immediately before his retirement or death while in
service had been absent from duty on extraordinary leave or had been under suspension,
the period whereof does not count as service, the emoluments which he drew immediately
before proceeding on such leave or being placed under suspension shall be the
emoluments for the purpose of this rule.

14. A Government servant promoted from lower to higher pay while on leave, on
which he would not receive the benefit of enhanced pay till he returned to duty, cannot, if he
retires without rejoining his appointment, claim the benefit of pension and gratuity calculated
on the pay to which he was promoted while on leave.

15. If a Government servant immediately before his retirement or death while in
service, was on privilege leave, and earned an increment which was not withheld, such
increment, though not actually drawn, shall form part of his emoluments:

Provided that the increment was earned during the currency of the privilege leave not
exceeding one hundred and twenty days, or during the first one hundred and twenty days of
privilege leave where such leave was for more than one hundred and twenty days.

16. Pay drawn by a Government servant while on deputation to Government of
India/Other State Governments shall not be treated as emoluments, but the pay which he
would have drawn under the Government had he not been on deputation to Government of
India/other State Government shall alone be treated as emoluments.

17. Pay drawn by a Government servant while on foreign service shall not be treated
as emoluments, but the pay which he would have drawn under the Government had he not
been on foreign service shall alone be treated as emoluments.

18. Pay drawn by a Government servant while on ex-cadre post shall not be treated
as emoluments but the pay which he would have drawn in the cadre had he not been on
excadre post shall alone be treated as emoluments.

19. Where a pensioner who is re-employed in Government service elects in terms of
clause (1) of sub rule (1) of rule 18 or who is governed under sub rule (2) of rule 19 to retain
his pension for earlier service and whose pay on re-employment has been reduced by an
amount not exceeding his pension, the element of pension by which his pay is reduced shall
be treated as emoluments.

20. Where a Government servant has been transferred to an autonomous body
consequent on the conversion of Department of the Government into such a body and the
Government servant so transferred opts to retain the pensionary benefits under the rules of
the Government, the emoluments drawn under the autonomous body shall be treated as
emoluments for the purpose of this rule.

21. If a Government servant has been on leave with or without allowances or under
suspension immediately before retirement, the provisions of Notes 1 and 13 shall apply
mutates mutandis in such cases also.

38
 GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

1०1 It has been decided by the Government that w.e.f. 01.07.2004, DA equal to 50%
of the existing basic pay shall be merged with the basic pay and shown distinctly as
Dearness Pay, which will be counted for HRA, CCA, retirement benefits. However, TA/ DA
on tour/ transfer and Government accommodation shall continue to be governed on the
basis of basic pay alone. Compulsory deductions for GPF and State Insurance shall also be
made on the basic pay alone.

DA on Dearness Pay will be paid only in respect of DA instalments that become due
on 01.07.2004 and afterwards. The existing amount of DA over and above 50% i.e. 11% will
be calculated only on the basis of basic pay and shall not be calculated on the basis of
Basic Pay + Dearness Pay. Further increases in DA (beyond 61%) will be calculated on the
basis of Basic Pay + Dearness Pay. For example, if 63% DA is payable from 01.07.2004,
50% will be converted to dearness way, 11% will be calculated on the basis of Basic Pay
alone and 2% will be calculated on the basis of Basic Pay + Dearness Pay. Similarly, if 65%
DA is payable on 01.01.2005, 50% will be converted to dearness pay, 11% will be
calculated on the basis of Basic Pay alone and 4% will be calculated on the basis of Basic
Pay + Dearness Pay. And so on.

Similarly, in case of existing pensioners, 50% dearness relief will be converted to
dearness pension. The amount of existing dearness relief over and above 50%, will be
calculated only against basic pension and shall not be calculated against basic pension +
dearness pension. Any increase in the existing dearness relief beyond 61% shall be
calculated against basic pension + dearness pension, on the lines indicated at para 2."

2. The State Government Pensioners are getting Dearness Relief @61% of
Pension/Family Pension w.e.f. 1.1.2004, out of which 50% has been converted to dearness
pension w.e.f. 1.7.2004 and the remaining 11% of Dearness Relief is to be calculated on
basic pension. Any increase in dearness relief on or after 1.7.04 is to be calculated on the
total of basic pension plus dearness pension as per provisions contained in Finance
Department Order No. F.6(3)FD/Rules/2004 dated 24.5.2004.

2. Consequent upon merger of 50% D.A. with Basic Pay, the existing minimum pension
of Rs. 1275/- p.m. is revised to Rs. 1913/- p.m. and existing maximum pension and family
pension is revised as under: | __ __
(i) Maximum Pension 50% of 33600/- i.e. maximum of highest pay Rs.16,800
scale in the Government 22400+ D.P. 11200
(ii) Maximum ordinary family pension 30% of 33600/-i.e. maximum of Rs.10,080
highest pay scale in the Government 22400+ D.P.11200
(iii) Maximum Enhanced Family Pension 50% of 33600/- i.e. maximum Rs.16,800
of highest pay scale in the Government 22400+ D.P.11200

3. Example of calculation of Pension and Dearness Relief of a Government servant
retiring on or after 1.7.2004 on an assumed Basic Pay of Rs. 10,000/- shall be as :-
(a Basic Pay of Rs. 10,000
(b) 50% D.A. on basic pay Rs. 5,000
0) Emoluments Rs. 15,000
(d) Pension @50% of emoluments for 33 years qualifying service Rs. 7,500
(e) Dearness Relief @11% on two third of basic pension i.e. 5,000/- Rs. 550
Note : In the aforesaid case further increase in Dearness Relief, if any, will be

calculated on pension of Rs. 7,500.

4. These orders shall come into force w.e.f. 1.7.2004.”

1. Inserted vide FD Order No.F.6(3)FD(Rules)/2004 dated 24.05.2004.
2. Inserted vide FD Order No.F.13(2)FD(Rules)/2004 dated 25.09.2004.

39
 ‘«Clarification

1. The State Government Pensioners, who were getting Dearness Relief @61% of
Pension/Family Pension w.e.f. 1.1.2004, out of which 50% has been converted to dearness
pension w.e.f. 1.7.2004 vide FD Order No. F.6(3)FD/Rules/2004 dated 24.5.2004.
Consequent upon merger of 50% Dearness Allowance with Basic Pay, the existing minimum
pension of Rs.1275/- per month has been revised to Rs.1913/- w.e.f. 1.7.2004 vide FD
Order No. F.13(2)FD(Rules)/2004 dated 25.9.2004.

Accordingly it is clarified that the minimum basic pension/ family pension with effect
from 1.7.2004 and onwards shall be regulated as under: -

Period of retirement/ death of a Rate of minimum pension / family pension
Government servant and Dearness Pension
1. upto 30.6.2004 Rs.
(i) Pension/ Family Pension 1275/-
(ii) Dearness Pension 638/-
Total 1913/-
2. 010 after 1.7.2004 Rs.
(i) Pension/ Family Pension 1913/-
(ii) Dearness Pension Nil
Total —1913/-
Note : In case of Government servant retiring on or after 1.7.2004, Dearness Relief

@ 11% shall be allowed on two third of basic pension / family pension.
Similarly in case of those retired upto 30.6.2004, Dearness Relief @ 11%
shall be allowed on basic pension / family pension only as provided in FD
order No.F.13(2)FD(Rules)/2004 dated 25.9.2004.”

2. Under Rule 45 of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules 1996, the
expression “emoluments” used for the purposes of pension, service gratuity and retirement /
death gratuity means pay as defined in Rule 7(24) of Rajasthan Service Rules which a
Government servant was receiving / or to which he was entitled immediately before his
retirement or on the date of death. As per the provisions contained in Rule 7(24) of
Rajasthan Service Rules pay includes Special Pay.

In the case of Government servant who retired while drawing special pay, it is
counted as emoluments on the basis of 10 months average.

In the case of promotion against the vacancy of earlier years by DPCs, the pay of a
person who has been so promoted is re-fixed at the pay which he would have drawn at the
time of his promotion but no arrears of pay is allowed to him.

Accordingly the matter has been examined and it is clarified that if a Government
servant, who is promoted against the vacancies of earlier years by DPC and becomes
entitled for grant of Special Pay of the promotion post, the presumptive average of special
pay of 10 months shall be counted as emoluments for the purpose of calculation of
pensionary benefits.”

46. Allowances which do not count
A Government servant cannot count the following allowances:-
(1) Allowances granted in consideration of the expensiveness of the locality;

(2) Messing or sumptuary allowances;

1. Inserted vide FD Clarification No.F.13(2)FD(Rules)/2004 dated 01.02.2006.
2. Inserted vide FD Clarification No.F.15(11)FD(Rules)/1997 dated 31.10.2006.

40

 (3) House rent allowance, or estimated value of free quarters;

(4) Traveling Allowances or allowances granted to meet the cost of the tour or
travel which a Government servant has to undertake;

(5) Compensation for dearness of provisions.
47. Net Emoluments taken

Any part of a Government servant’s pay or emoluments which is specially intended
to provide for expenses incidental to his duty must be excluded.

The following are examples of the operation of this rule:-

(1) When a Government servant's pay is intended partly to cover the expenses of his
providing or keeping a horse, his pay must be taken only at what it would be if it was not
intended to cover such expenses. When water-carrier’s pay includes provision for a bullock
his pay must be taken at what it would be if he was not required to keep a bullock.

(2) When a consolidated pay specially includes Traveling Allowance, or House
Allowance these must be deducted.

(3) When a Government servant's pay is fixed at two rates, a smaller rate during
stationery duty and a higher rate during periods passed on tour or traveling, the former rate
alone should be the basis of the calculation.

48. Regulation of pension on holding more than one appointment

If an officer has held more than one appointment in respect of each of which, if he
had it separately and alone, pension would have been admissible to him, the pension
admissible to him is the sum of the several pensions which would have been admissible to
him if he had held each office separately and alone. The consolidated pension thus
admissible is subject to the limitations prescribed in Rules 54 and 55 of the Rajasthan Civil
Service (Pension) Rules, 1996.

49. No increase in pension for holding more than one office conjointly

A Government servant is not entitled, for service in an office conjointly with another
office, to any pension which would not have been admissible to him if he had held the office
separately and alone.

41
 CHAPTER V
REGULATION OF AMOUNTS OF PENSIONS
A- (i) PREMATURE RETIREMENT

50. Retirement on completion of 15 years’ qualifying Service

(1) At any time after a Government servant has completed fifteen years qualifying
service, he may, by giving notice of not less than three months in writing to the appointing
authority, retire from service."

(2) The notice of voluntary retirement given under sub rule (1) shall require
acceptance by the appointing authority:

Provided that where the appointing authority does not refuse to grant the permission
for retirement before the expiry of the period specified in the said notice, the retirement shall
automatically become effective from the date of expiry of the said period.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

Guidelines for acceptance of notice. - A notice of voluntary retirement given after
completion of ?"fifteen years" qualifying service will require acceptance by the appointing
authority. Such acceptance may be generally given in all cases except that the Appointing
Authority shall withhold permission to retire a Government servant:

(i) who is under suspension;

(ii) in whose case the disciplinary proceedings are pending or contemplated for
the imposition of a major penalty and the disciplinary authority having regard
to the circumstances of the case, is of the view that such disciplinary
proceedings might result in imposition of the penalty of removal or dismissal
from service;

(iii) in whose case prosecution is contemplated or may have been launched in a
court of law.

In such cases, if it is proposed to accept the notice of voluntary retirement approval
of the Government should be obtained. Even where the notice of voluntary retirement given
by the Government servant requires acceptance by the appointing authority, the
Government servant giving notice may presume acceptance and the retirement shall be
effective in terms of the notice unless the competent authority issues an order to the
contrary before the expiry of the period of notice.

(3) (a) A Government servant referred to in sub rule (1) may make a request in
writing to the appointing authority to accept notice of voluntary retirement
of less than three months giving reasons thereof;

1. The existing sub-rule (1) of Rules 50 substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 1.12.1999.

"50. Retirement on completion of 20 years’ qualifying Service

(1) At any time after a Government servant has completed twenty years qualifying service, he
may, by giving notice of not less than three months in writing to the appointing authority, retire from
service."

2. The existing words "twenty years" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 1.12.1999.

42
 (b) On receipt of a request under clause (a), the appointing authority subject
to the provisions of sub rule (2), may consider such request for the
curtailment of the period of notice of three months on merits and if it is
satisfied that the curtailment of the period of notice will not cause any
administrative inconvenience, the appointing authority may relax the
requirement of notice of three months.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

In case a Government servant seeks voluntary retirement under rule 50 (1) of
Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, with a view to contest any election to
Parliament/State Assembly/Municipalities/Panchayati Raj Institutions, he may be retired by
the competent authority under rule 50 of RCS (Pension) Rules immediately without
prejudice to the right of Government going into the genuineness of the reasons and
verification of the qualifying service rendered, and the period of notice prescribed under rule
50 (1) of Rajasthan Civil Service (Pension) Rules shall in such cases be deemed to have
been waived as a matter of course.

(4) A Government servant, who has elected to retire under this rule and has given
the necessary notice to that effect to the appointing authority, shall be precluded from
withdrawing his notice except with the specific approval of such authority:

Provided that the request for withdrawal shall be made before the intended date of
his retirement.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION
Withdrawal of notice of retirement not ordinarily permissible

A question has been raised whether a Government servant who has given to the
appropriate authority, notice of retirement has any right subsequently (but during the
currency of the notice) to withdraw the same and return to duty. The question has been
considered carefully and the conclusion reached is that the Government servant has no
such rights. There would, however, be no objection to permission being given to such a
Government servant, on consideration of the circumstances of his case, to withdraw the
notice given by him, but ordinarily such permission should not be granted unless he is in a
position to show that there has been a material change in the circumstances in consid-
eration of which the notice was originally given.

(5) The pension and retirement gratuity of the Government servant retiring under this
rule shall be based on the emoluments as defined under rule 45 of Rajasthan Civil Services
(Pension) Rules, 1996, which the Government servant was receiving immediately before the
date of retirement, and the increase not exceeding five years in his qualifying service under
rule 51 shall not entitle him to any notional fixation of pay for purposes of calculating
pension and gratuity.

(6) This rule shall not apply to a Government servant who retires from Government
service for being absorbed permanently in an autonomous body or a public sector
undertaking to which he is on deputation at the time of seeking voluntary retirement.

EXPLANATION - For the purpose of this rule, the expression “appointing authority”
shall mean the authority which is competent to make appointments to the service or post
from which the Government servant seeks voluntary retirement.

43
 (7) If a Government servant seeks retirement under this rule while he is on leave not
due, without returning to duty, the retirement, shall take effect from the date of
commencement of the leave not due and the leave salary paid in respect of such leave shall
be recovered from him.

™(8) A Government servant who gives notice of voluntary retirement under sub rule
(1) of rule 50 shall satisfy himself by means of a reference to the appointing authority who is
competent to retire him to the effect that he has, in fact, completed 15 years qualifying
service for pension."

51. Addition to qualifying service on voluntary retirement

(1) The qualifying service as on the date of intended retirement of the Government
servant retiring under Rule 50(1) shall be increased by the period not exceeding five years,
subject to the condition that the total qualifying service rendered by the Government servant
does not in any case exceed thirty-three years and it does not take him beyond the date of
superannuation.

(2) The weightage of five years notional qualifying service shall not be admissible in
cases of those Government servants who are prematurely retired by the Government in the
public interest under rule 53(1).

52. Addition to qualifying service on voluntary retirement by employees declared
surplus

Notwithstanding anything contained in rules 50 and 51, the employee declared
surplus from time to time shall be eligible for seeking voluntary retirement after completion of
10 years of qualifying service and attaining the age of 35 years. In such cases, a weightage
of only two years qualifying service shall be given in addition to the qualifying service
actually rendered by the surplus employee, subject to the condition that the total qualifying
service rendered by the Government servant does not in any case exceed 33 years and it
does not take him beyond the date of superannuation.

1. The existing sub-rule (8) of Rules 50 substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 1.12.1999.
"(8) A Government servant who gives notice of voluntary retirement under sub rule (1) of rule 50 shall satisfy
himself by means of a reference to the appointing authority who is competent to retire him to the effect that
he has, in fact, completed 20 years qualifying service for pension."

44
 53. Compulsory retirement on completion of 15 years qualifying service.

(1) At any time, after a Government servant has completed 15 years qualifying
service or has attained the age of 50 years, whichever is earlier, the appointing authority,
upon having been satisfied that the concerned government servant has on account of his
indolence or doubtful integrity or incompetence to discharge official duties or inefficiency in
due performance of official duties, has lost his utility, may require the concerned
Government servant to retire in public interest after following the procedure laid down by the
Government in Department of Personnel/Administrative Reforms Department. In case of
such retirement, the Government servant shall be entitled to retiring pension.

(2) In such a case, the appointing authority shall give a notice in writing to a
Government servant at least three months before the date on which he is required to retire
in the public interest or three months’ pay and allowances in lieu of such notice.

(3) The appointing authority may publish the order of such retirement in
Rajasthan Rajpatra, and the Government servant shall be deemed to have retired on such
publication, if he has not been served with the retirement order earlier.

(4) In such a case, the compulsorily retired employee may represent against the
order of compulsory retirement within a period of 30 days to :-
1. the H.E. the Governor : For employees of State Services
2. the Committee of Secretary, : For employees other than State
Department of Personnel and one Services

other Secretary to Government to
be nominated by Chief Secretary in
each case.

Provided that before deciding the representation, comments of the appointing
authority shall be obtained.

(5) In case it is decided to re-instate a prematurely retired Government servant in
service after considering his representation, the authority shall pass order regarding the
period intervening between the date of premature retirement and the date of re-instatement/
age of superannuation, as the case may be.

EXPLANATION - For the purpose of this rule, the expression “appointing authority”
shall mean the authority which is competent to make appointments to the service or post
from which the Government servant is retired."

1. The existing Rule 53 shall be substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 8.6.2004.
@«53, Compulsory retirement on completion of 15 years’ qualifying service
(1) At any time, after a Government servant has completed 15 years qualifying service or has attained the age of 50 years, whichever is
earlier, the appointing authority, upon having been satisfied that the concerned government servant has on account of his indolence or
doubtful integrity or incompetence to discharge official duties or inefficiency in due performance of official duties, has lost his utility, may
require the concerned government servant to retire in public interest. In case of such retirement, the government servant shall be entitled to
retiring pension.
(2) In such a case, the appointing authority shall give a notice in writing to a Government servant at least three months before the date on
which he is required to retire in the public interest or three months’ pay and allowances in lieu of such notice.
(3) The appointing authority may publish the order of such retirement in Rajasthan Rajpatra, and the Government servant shall be deemed
to have retired on such publication, if he has not been served with the retirement order earlier.
EXPLANATION - For the purpose of this rule, the expression “appointing authority” shall mean the authority which is competent to make
appointments to the service or post from which the Government servant retires.”

@__ The existing sub-rule (1) of Rules 53 again substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 1.12.1999.
2०53, Compulsory retirement on completion of 25 years qualifying service
“(1) At any time, after a Government servant has completed 25 years qualifying service or has attained the age of 50
years, whichever is earlier, the appointing authority, upon having been satisfied that the concerned government servant
has on account of his indolence or doubtful integrity or incompetence to discharge official duties or inefficiency in due
performance of official duties, has lost his utility, may require the concerned government servant to retire in public interest.
In case of such retirement, the government servant shall be entitled to retiring pension."

%. The existing sub-rule (1) of Rules 53 substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(6)FD(Rules)/97 dated 27.6.1998.
"(1) At any time after a Government servant has completed twenty-five years qualifying service or has attained the age of
50 years, whichever is earlier, he may be required by the appointing authority to retire in the public interest, and in the
case of such retirement the Government servant shall be entitled to a retiring pension.”

45
 NOTES

1. The Government has the absolute right to retire a Government servant in public
interest. This right is intended to be exercised against a Government servant whose
efficiency is impaired, but against whom it is not desirable to make formal charges of
inefficiency or who has ceased to be fully efficient but not to such a degree as to warrant his
retirement on compassionate allowance. It is not the intention to use this rule as a financial
weapon, that is to say, the provision should be used only in the case of Government
servants who are considered unfit for retention on personal as opposed to financial grounds.

2. Participation in or abetting in any form of strike by a Government servant shall also
be deemed to be included in “public interest” for the purpose of rule 53 (1).

3. The Appointing Authority shall follow the procedure as prescribed or as may be
prescribed by the Department of Personnel from time to time where a Government servant
is retired under this rule for reasons of impairment of efficient or doubtful integrity.

4. Compulsory retirement under this rule does not attract the provisions of clause (2)
of Article 311 of the Constitution of India because such retirement is not conceived as a
penalty but as the exercise of a right reserved to Government of retiring a Government
servant after he has served for a certain length of time. Accordingly, the procedure laid
down in the Rajasthan Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, for formal
proceedings against Government servants before removing them from service is not meant
to apply to such cases.

5. This rule is also applicable to Government servants who are members of
Contributory Provident Fund. In their cases, the term ‘qualifying service’ shall mean service
commencing on the day Government servant started subscribing towards Contributory
Provident Fund.

6. When the appropriate authority has come to the conclusion that a Government
employee may be prematurely retired, the three months’ notice referred to in rule 53 (2)
may be given before the Government servant attains the age of 50 years or has completed
™45 years" of service, as the case may be. But, the retirement should take place after the
Government servant has attained the relevant age or has completed "15 years" of service,
as the case may be.

7. Orders requiring a Government employee to retire after completing "15 years”
qualifying service should, as a rule, not be issued until after the fact that the Government
employee has indeed completed, or would be completing on the date of retirement,
qualifying service of '"15 years", has been verified by the appointing authority in consultation
with the senior most member of the Rajasthan Accounts Service posted in the Department.

8. While computing the notice period of not less than three months, referred to in
rule 53 (2) of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, the date of service of the
notice and the date of its expiry shall be excluded. The date of premature retirement of a
Government employee should be on the forenoon of the day (which should be treated as a
non-working day) following the day of expiry of the notice.

9. It is necessary to give three months notice in writing or three months’ pay and
allowances in lieu of notice to a Government servant under suspension who is proposed to
be retired under rule 53 (1) of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.

It has been decided that an authority competent to retire a Government servant
under rule 53 (1) should give three months’ notice in the type of cases referred to above
and may not take recourse to the other alternative of paying three months’ pay and
allowances in lieu of notice.

1. The existing figure and word "25 years" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 1.12.1999.

46
 CLARIFICATIONS

1.

(i)

On orders of premature retirement

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Date of retirement: The orders regarding retirement on the last day of the
month will not apply to the cases of premature retirement.

Grant of leave due/admissible: Leave due and admissible may be allowed if
applied for by the Government servant during the period of notice.

Undrawn increment: As the Government servant continues to be in service
during the period of notice, he will be entitled to increment falling due during
the period, under rule 31 of Rajasthan Service Rules. If, on the other hand,
the official is retired by giving pay and allowances in lieu of the notice period,
no increment will be admissible as the retirement in such cases takes
immediate effect.

On admissibility of pension in addition to pay and allowances (inclusive of
H.R.A. & C.C.A.) for the entire period in lieu of Notice

(i)

(ii)

(iii)
(iv)

(v)
(vi)

1.

As the Government servant concerned will retire immediately on payment of
pay and allowances in lieu of notice, he would be entitled to pension from the
date of such retirement and the pension shall not be deferred till after the
expiry of the period of three months for which he is paid pay and allowances.
In other words, pay and allowances given in lieu of the notice period would be
in addition to pension for the said period.

The Government servants who are given pay and allowances in lieu of the
notice period are entitled to House Rent Allowance and City Compensatory
Allowance at the rates at which they were drawing the allowances
immediately before retirement.

The payment of pay and allowances in lieu of the notice period should be
made simultaneously with the order of retirement.

The pay and allowances to be given in lieu of notice period would be the pay
and allowances drawn by him immediately before retirement. Since he would
stand retired immediately on payment of pay and allowances, the question of
taking into consideration the date of increment does not arise.

The three months’ pay and allowances given in lieu of notice are salary and
therefore, income tax is required to be deducted at source.

The Government servant would stand retired immediately on payment of
three months’ pay and allowances in lieu of the notice period and will not be
in service thereafter. Therefore, the question of counting any period
subsequent to the date of such retirement for purposes of pension etc. does
not arise.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

Procedure for payment of notice period’s pay and allowances on retirement

Payments in lieu of three months’ notice will arise in cases where retirement of an
officer by giving three months’ notice may not be desirable in public interest. The following
procedure has been prescribed in relaxation of the provisions of the Treasury Rules :-

The drawing and disbursing officer in a department may be authorised by the
competent authority to draw a special advance from the treasury whenever claims of
the type are to be met. It will not be necessary to mention therein the name(s) of the
Government servant(s) to be so retired. The amount of advance to be sanctioned by
the competent authority shall be restricted to the net amount to be paid to the
Government servant(s).

47
 (ii) The amount to be paid to a Government servant to be so retired should be computed
on the basis of -

(a) pay and allowances which he is receiving at the time of retirement, less
(b) statutory deductions like income tax.

All other dues outstanding against the Government servant such as House
Building Advance, Conveyance Advance, House Rent, Traveling Allowance, etc.
may be left to be recovered from the gratuity payable under the R.C.S. (Pension)
Rules, 1996. It is also not necessary to make any deductions relating to G.P.F.,
Insurance etc. from the payment to be made.

(iii) The special advance may be drawn by the drawing and disbursing officer on a bill in
the form of a simple receipt. A signed copy of the sanction should be enclosed with
the bill to be submitted to the treasury.

(iv) The special advance may be adjusted under Major Head, “8550 - Civil Advances -
103 - Other Departmental Advances - Miscellaneous (Other) Advances”. An
adjustment bill will thereafter be sent to the Accountant General alongwith
acquittance of the Government servant(s) concerned together with the charge
report(s), if any, for the adjustment of the advance to the final head of account.

2. If, in any case, it is decided to reinstate a prematurely retired Government
employee in a service after considering his representation in accordance with the laid down
instructions, the period intervening between the date of premature retirement and the date of
retirement may be regulated by the authority ordering reinstatement as duty or as leave or
dies non, as the case may be, taking into account the merits of each case.

3. In the case of an employee who had been prematurely retired on grounds of
inefficiency and by the time the competent authority to consider representations against
such premature retirement came to the conclusion that premature retirement was unjustified,
the date of superannuation of the employee has already arrived or had passed, in such
cases the authorities empowered to pass final orders may at their discretion reinstate the
superannuated Government servant notionally with effect from the date of compulsory
retirement and treat the period up to the date of superannuation, as duty, leave or dies non
as may be considered appropriate by the competent authority.

4. Where a prematurely retired Government servant is reinstated in service and the
intervening period beginning from the date of retirement and ending with date immediately
before his rejoining duty has been treated as on duty in accordance with G.R.D. No. 2 or 3
or as a result of the orders of the competent Court, the pay and allowances shall be
regulated under Rule 54 of Rajasthan Service Rules. The pay and allowances shall be paid
at the rates in force from time to time as if he has not been prematurely retired from service.

On reinstatement of the Government servant, he shall be required to refund three
months’ notice pay, amount of Retirement/Death Gratuity, pension including commutation
and dearness relief on pension etc., if already paid to him, in one lump sum within a period
of one month from the date of rejoining the duty otherwise interest shall be charged @ 12%
per annum. With regard to the refund of G.P.F money and Insurance amount if any received
by him, the action shall be taken in accordance with the relevant G.P.F. Rules and
Insurance Rules.

For making payment of pay and allowances for the intervening period, the
Government servant would be required to furnish a certificate to the effect that he was not
engaged in any other employment, business, profession or vocation. In case he was
engaged in any employment etc. he will be paid an amount equal to the amount by which
his earning during the intervening period fell short of the amount of pay and allowances now
becoming due and payable. The details of refund should be mentioned in the Service Book
giving reference of pay bills and challan number and date under the attested signatures of
the Head of Office.

48
 1g, In accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 53 of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 the appointing authority is competent to retire a
Government Servant who has completed 15 years' qualifying service or has attained the age
of 50 years, whichever is earlier after following the procedure laid dawn Administrative
Department order no. F.6(9)AR/Sec.3/2001 dated 7.3.2001.

A question has been raised regarding the procedure for disposal of representation, if
any, made by the retired Government Servant against the order of retirement passed by the
appointing authority under the aforesaid rule. The matter has been considered and it has
been decided that the following authority will be competent to dispose off such
representation received : -

1. HE the Governor : For employees of State Services.
2. Committee of Administrative : For employees other than State Services.
Secretary and Secretary, DOP

Before disposing off any representation, comments of the appointing authority, which
took the decision of compulsory retirement, will be obtained. The Representation Disposing
Authority, in its discretion, may grant hearing to the applicant.

In case it is decided to re-instate a prematurely retired Government servant in
service after considering his representation, the authority shall pass order regarding the
period intervening between the date of premature retirement and the date of re-instatement/
age of superannuation, as the case may be, as required under GRD No. 2 and 3 appearing
below Rules 53 of the aforesaid rules.

The provisions of this order shall not be applicable to a Government Servant who is
compulsorily retired as a penalty under the Rajasthan Civil Services (Classification, Control
and Appeal) Rules, 1958."

2"3. The attention is invited towards Finance Department Memorandum of even
number dated 3.12.2002 vide which procedure for disposal of representation, if any, made
by a Government Servant compulsorily retired under Rule 53 of Rajasthan Civil Services
(Pension) Rules, 1996 has been laid down.

This matter is being further looked. Accordingly the provisions of the aforesaid
Memorandum shall be held in abeyance till further orders.”

3"4, The attention is invited towards Finance Department Memorandum of even
Number Dated 30.7.2003 vide which the provision of Finance Department Memorandum of
even number dated 3.12.2002 was held in abeyance till further orders.

It has been decided that representations received in pursuance of Finance
Department Memorandum of even number dated 3.12.2002 by 29.7.2003 shall the
considered and decided in accordance with the provisions contained in Finance Department
Memorandum dated 3.12.2002 on merit.

4

"5. राजस्थान सिविल सेवा (पेंशन) नियम, 1996 के नियम 53 के अन्तर्गत अनिवार्य सेवानिवृत्त
कर्मचारियों को दिनांक 30.7.2003 से 7.6.2004 की अवधि में अनिवार्य सेवानिवृत्ति के विरूद्ध प्रतिवेदन प्रस्तुत करने का
अवसर नहीं दिया था | अतः यह निर्णय किया गया है कि उक्त अवधि में अनिवार्य सेवानिवृत्त कर्मचारियों के प्रतिवेदन जो
आदेश के जारी होने की तिथि से 30 दिन में प्राप्त हुए हैं, उन्हें वित्त विभाग की समसंख्यक अधिसूचना दिनांक 8.6.2004
में निर्धारित प्रक्रिया अपनाकर निस्तारित किए जावें |

Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 3.12.2002.

Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 30.7.2003.

Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 13.2.2004 and corrected vide FD Corrigendum of even
number dated 17.2.2004.

4. Inserted vide FD Order No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/99 dated 22.7.2004.

oN

49
 ™53A. Compulsory retirement of a Government servant who has more than three
children :-

(1)

(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules appointing authority shall
have right to retire a Government servant in public interest, if he/she has more
than three children on or after 1st June, 2002 and in such cases Government
servant shall be entitled to proportionate pension and/or service gratuity, as
the case may be:

Provided that where a Government servant has only two children from the
earlier delivery(ies) but more than one child are born out of a single
subsequent delivery, the children so born shall be deemed to be one entity
while counting the total number of children.

Provided further that the provisions of this rule shall not be applicable to a
Government servant who has more than three children so long as the number
of children he/she has on 31st May, 2002 does not increase."

In such a case, the appointing authority shall retire the Government servant
after giving him/her three months' notice.

If the order of retirement could not be served to the Government servant within
15 days from the date of its issue, the appointing authority shall publish the
order of such retirement in Rajasthan Rajpatra and the Government servant
shall be deemed to have retired on such publication.

EXPLANATION - For the purpose of this rule, the expression "Appointing Authority"
shall mean the authority which is competent to make appointments to the service or post
from which the Government servant retires."

A- (ii) AMOUNT OF PENSION

54. Amount of pension

The amount of superannuation, retiring, invalid and compensation pension and
service gratuity shall be as follows :-

(1) In the case of a Government servant retiring in accordance with the provisions of
these rules before completing qualifying service of ten years, the amount of service gratuity
shall be calculated at the rate of half month’s emoluments for every completed six monthly
period of qualifying service.

(2)

(a) In the case of a Government servant retiring in accordance with the

provisions of these rules after completing qualifying service of not less
than thirty-three years, the amount of pension shall be calculated at "fifty
percent of the emoluments subject to maximum upto fifty percent of
highest pay in the Government “[(the highest pay in the Government is
Rs. 24,850/- since 1.7.1996)]" as defined under rule 45 of R.C.S. (Pen-
sion) Rules, 1996, which the Government servant was receiving
immediately before the date of retirement.

Inserted vide FD Notification No.F.13(3)FD(Rules)/2001 dated 4.10.2001.

2. The existing words "fifty percent of the emoluments" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated
21.3.1998 w.ef. 1.10.1996.

३. The existing words and figures "(the highest pay in the Government is Rs.22,400/- since 1.9.1996)” substituted vide FD
Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 20.4.2004 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.

50
 (b) In the case of a Government servant retiring in accordance with the
provisions of these rules before completing qualifying service of thirty-
three years, but after completing qualifying service of ten years, the
amount of pension shall be proportionate to the amount of pension
admissible under clause (a) and in no case the amount of pension shall
be less than “rupees one thousand two hundred seventy five per
mensem'";

(c) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) and clause (b), the
amount of invalid pension shall not be less than the amount of family pen-
sion admissible under sub rule (i) to rule 62.

(3) In calculating the length of qualifying service, fraction of a year equal to three
months and above shall be treated as a completed one-half year and reckoned as qualifying
service.

(4) The amount of pension finally determined under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub
rule (2), shall be expressed in whole rupees and where the pension contains a fraction of a
rupee it shall be rounded off to the next rupee.

NOTES

1. The gratuities which may be sanctioned under rules 54(1) and 55(1) will constitute
the assets of the Government servant and in the event of his death before receiving
payment of the amounts, they can be paid to his legal heirs under the ordinary law of
succession. Rules 56 (1) and 56 (2), however, create a benefit directly in favour of the
nominee or the specific member of the family of the Government servants as the case may
be, and a gratuity sanctioned under these paragraphs will form the assets of the persons in
whose favour the sanction is accorded and not the deceased Government servant.

2. For the purpose of commutation of pension, the amount of original invalid pension
will only be taken into account. However, the dearness relief on pension will be determined
on the basis of stepped up amount of pension as per sub rule 2(c) above.

2"(4) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION
The Governor is pleased to order that the Pension/ Family Pension of all the pre-

1.9.1996 State Pensioners/ Family pensioners be revised with effect from 1.9.1996 in the
manner indicated in the succeeding paragraphs.

Applicability :
2. These orders shall apply to all service pensioners/family pensioners who were in

receipt of pension/family pension on 1.9.1996 under the Rajasthan Service Rules, except to
those who have been specifically excluded under this order.
Definitions :
3. In these orders -
(a) ‘Existing pensioner’ or 'Existing Family pensioner’ means a pensioner who was
drawing/ entitled to pension/ family pension as on 31.8.1996.
(b) ‘Existing pension’ means the basic pension inclusive of commuted portion if
any, due on 31.8.1996.
(c) ‘Existing family pension’ means the basic family pension drawn on 31.8.1996.

1. The existing words "rupees three hundred per mensem" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated
21.3.1998 w.ef. 1.10.1996.
2. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998.

51
 (d) ‘Existing Dearness Relief’ means the relief due to pensioners/ family
pensioners upto average CPI 1510. i.e. admissible under Finance Department
order No.F.1(25)FD(Gr.2)/93 dated 7.5.1996.

(e) ‘Bank’ means the branch of the Bank from which the pensioner is getting his
pension.

Consolidation/ Revision of Pension :

4. The pension/family pension of existing pre-1.9.1996 pensioners/ family pensioners
will be consolidated with effect from 1.9.1996 by adding together -

(i) | The existing pension/family pension.

(ii) | Existing Dearness Relief upto CPI 1510 i.e. @ 148%, 111% and 96% of Basic
Pension as admissible vide Finance Department Order No.F.1(25)FD(Gr.2)/93
dated 7.5.1996.

(iii) Interim Relief - |

(iv) Interim Relief - II

(v) Fitment weightage @ 40% of the existing pension/ family pension.

5 The amount so arrived at will be regarded as consolidated pension/ family pension
with effect from 1.9.1996. Upper ceiling on pension and family pension shall be 50% and

0% respectively of highest pay in the Government (the highest pay in the Government is
Rs. 22,400/- since 1.9.1996). Since the consolidated pension will be inclusive of commuted
portion of pension, if any, the commuted portion will be deducted from the said amount while
making monthly disbursements.

6. The consolidated pension/family pension as worked out in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph 4 above shall be treated as final ‘Basic Pension’ / Basic family
pension’ with effect from 1.9.1996 and shall qualify for grant of Dearness Relief sanctioned
thereafter in respect of following categories of pensioners/ family pensioners:-

(i) | Pensioners, who retired between the period 1.9.1988 to 31.8.1996.

(ii) Family pensioners, who became entitled for family pension during the period
1.9.1988 to 31.8.1996 and were sanctioned family pension at the rate of 30%
of the last pay drawn by the deceased employee.

छह In case of other pensioners/ family pensioners, these orders provide for revision/
consolidation of pension with effect from 1.9.1996 as an interim measure only so as to
provide them immediate relief and shall be subject to variation. Detailed instructions
regarding fixation of their pay on notional basis/revision/consolidation of pension/ family
pension and issue of authorisation in this regard will be issued separately. Pending issue of
detailed instructions as stated above, grant of pension/ family pension to all these
pensioners/family pensioners may be continued to be regulated under these orders.

Dearness Relief of Pension :

8. Since the consolidated pension/ family pension arrived at as per paragraph 4
includes dearness relief upto CPI 1510, dearness relief will be admissible with effect from
1.1.1997 only beyond CPI 1510 in accordance with the revised scheme of dearness relief
for which orders are being issued separately. The payment made since 1.1.1997 on account
of two instalments of dearness relief sanctioned earlier from 1.7.1996 and 1.1.1997 vide
Finance Department Order No.F.1(25)FD(Rules)/93 dated 25.10.1996 and dated 1.5.1997
respectively shall be adjusted against dearness relief becoming due on the consolidated
pension/ family pension with effect from 1.1.1997.

9. The employed/re-employed pensioners/family pensioners are not getting dearness
relief on pension at present under the extant orders. In their case the notional dearness
relief which would have been admissible to them but for their employment/re-employment

52
 will be taken into account for consideration of their pension in terms of paragraph 4 above
as if they were drawing the dearness relief. Their pay will be re-fixed w.e.f. 1.9.1996 with
reference to consolidated pension becoming admissible to them. Dearness relief with effect
from 1.1.1997 will, however, not be admissible to them during the period of employment/re-
employment.

Treatment of third interim relief :

10. The payment already made from 1.4.1996 to 31.12.1996 on account of Third
instalment of Interim Relief sanctioned vide Finance Department Order
No.F.1(14)FD(Rules)/95 dated 22.10.1996 with effect from 1.4.1996 will not be recovered.
The payment of Third Interim Relief made from 1.1.1997 onwards will be adjusted against
the arrears becoming due on consolidation of pension/family pension and sanction of
dearness relief on consolidated pension/family pension.

Minimum pension/ family pension :

11. Where the consolidated pension/ family pension in terms of paragraph 4 above
works out to an amount less than Rs.1275/- the same shall stepped to Rs.1275/-. This will
be regarded as pension/ family pension with effect from 1.9.1996. In the case of pensioners
who are in receipt of more than one pension, the floor ceiling of Rs.1275/- will apply to the
total of all pensions taken together.

Permanent absorption in PSUs/ Autonomous Bodies :

12. In cases of State Government employees who have been permanently absorbed in
Public Sector Undertaking/ Autonomous Bodies and have drawn one time lumpsum terminal
benefit equal to 100% of their pension, their cases will not be covered by these orders even
if one third of their pension was restored.

Not accrual of arrears for the period 1.9.1996 to 31.12.1996 :

13. Notwithstanding anything contained in these orders no arrears shall be payable for
the period 1.9.1996 to 31.12.1996 on account of consolidation/ revision of pension.

Table for calculating arrears :

14. A table indicating the existing pension, the consolidated pension and difference
payable from 1.1.1997 is enclosed for ready reference.

Mode of payment of arrears for the period 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997 :

15. The arrear becoming payable as a result of consolidation of pension/family pension
for the period from 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997 as above will be paid in the following manner -

(1) Pensioners/ family pensioners who are below the age of 70 years on 1.1.1998

(a) be paid the amount of arrear for the period 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997 in sixty
equal monthly instalments alongwith the regular pension or

(b) at the option of pensioner, the amount of arrear may be credited in
General Provident Fund Account shall remain deposited upto 31.3.2003
and no withdrawals during this period shall be admissible except in case
of death of a pensioner/ family pensioner. Interest shall be payable on the
amount so deposited in the General Provident Fund Accounts as per
rates in force from time to time.

(2) Pensioners/ family pensioners who have attained the age of 70 years on
1.1.1998 shall be paid the amount of arrear in cash.

53
 16.

The procedure for payment of arrear

(i)

(ii)

(iii)
(iv)

(v)

(vi)

The Pensioner/ family pensioner shall surrender his/her half of Pension
Payment Order to the pension disbursing authority i.e. the branch of the Bank/
Pension Payment Officer/ Treasury Officer, as the case may be, requesting for
consolidation of his/her pension/family pension in the proforma enclosed with
this order.

The Pension paying branch of the Bank will forward both the halves of Pension
Payment Order indicating the amount of pension/family pension and dearness
relief and Interim Relief paid so far to the concerned Treasury Officer/Pension
Payment Officer. The Bank shall, however, even after sending the Pension
Payment Order to the Pension Payment Officer/Treasury Officer, shall continue
to make disbursement of pension/family pension at the last rate for a period of
six_ months or receipt of the revised Pension Payment Order, whichever is
earlier.

The Pension Payment Officer/Treasury Officer shall consolidate pension/ family
pension on 1.9.1996 as per provision of this order.

The Pension Payment Officer/ Treasury Officer shall calculate the amount of
arrear payable to the pensioner with the help of the table referred to in
paragraph 14 of this order.

The Pension Payment Officer/Treasury Officer, in case of pensioner/family
pensioner who have attained the age of 70 years as on 1.1.1998, shall
authorise the payment of arrear in cash. Where the pensioner was getting
pension from a Bank, the authority for payment of arrear as well as the revised
pension payment order shall be forwarded to the same branch of the Bank from
which the pensioner was earlier getting pension. While authorising the monthly
disbursement of pension, the amount of commuted portion if any, shall be
deducted from the consolidated pension.

(a) In case of pensioners/ family pensioners who are below the age of 70
years as on 1.1.1998, the amount of arrear for the period 1.1.1997 to
31.12.1997 shall, at the option of the pensioner be credited to the GPF
Alc or shall be paid in sixty equal monthly instalments commencing from
1.4.1998. The Pension Payment Officer/ Treasury Officer with respect to
the procedure to be followed for crediting the arrear amount in the
General Provident Fund Account shall refer to the amendments made in
the Rajasthan Government Servant's General Provident Fund Rules,
1997 issued vide Finance Department Notification No.F.2(1)FD(Rules)/96
dated 21.3.1998.

(b) In case of those pensioners/ family pensioners who are below 70 years of
age on 1.1.1998 and who have given option to receive the arrear amount
in 60 equal monthly instalments, the Pension Payment Officer/ Treasury
Officer shall indicate the amount of the instalments in the pension
payment order separately and the date upto which such amount shall be
paid in the format given below :-

"Arrear with effect from 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997 has been calculated as
Rs. which will be payable in sixty intalments @ Rs. per
month with effect from 1.4.1998 along with pension. The last instalment
shall be payable on 1.4.2003."

(c) The arrear amount for the period commencing from 1.1.1998 till the
authorisation of monthly disbursement of consolidated pension/family
pension shall be payable in cash for which the Treasury Officer/Pension
Payment Officer shall send the necessary authority to the Bank.

54
 (d) In case of death of a pensioner, the balance amount shall be payable to
his nominee or legal heir, as the case may be, in lump sum.

17%. It is considered desirable that the benefit of these orders should reach the pensioner
as expeditiously as possible. To achieve this object it is desired that all pension disbursing
authorities should ensure that the procedure of revision in pension alongwith the treatment
of arrear as indicated in preceeding paragraphs should be completed by 30th June, 1998
positively.

18. In the case of pensioners receiving pension outside the State the concerned
Treasury Officer of that State shall consolidate/ revise the pension/ family pension with
effect from 1.9.1996 as per provision of this order. The Treasury Officer shall authorise
payment of arrear amount on account of consolidation/ revision of pension in case of
pensioners who have attained the age of 70 years or more as on 1.1.1998. However, in
case of pensioners/ family pensioners below the age of 70 years as on 1.1.1998 the arrear
amount for the period 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997 shall be authorised by the Treasury Officer for
payment in 60 equal monthly instalments commencing from 1.4.1998. The Treasury Officer
shall follow the same procedure as has been indicated at paragraph 16 of this order. If the
pensioner/family pensioner receiving pension outside the State opts for crediting his / her
arrear amount in the G.P.F. account then both halves of his/her P.P.O. shall be sent to the
Director, Pension through the usual channel alongwith application in the prescribed
proforma for further necessary action.”

55
 APPLICATION FOR CONSOLIDATION/ REVISION OF
PRE - 1.9.1996 PENSION/ FAMILY PENSION

(To be submitted in triplicate)
To,

The ,
(Pension Disbursing Authority)

Subject : Revision of pension/ family pension in terms of Finance Department
Order No. dated

Sir,
Kindly revised my pension/ family pension entitlement shown in my PPO, in terms of
the above mentioned order. The pensioner's half of PPO is enclosed. The requisite

particulars are given below :-

1. Name of the applicant in block letters and
full postal address

2. Type of pension admissible

3: Name of the deceased Government servant/
pensioner in case of family pension

(Applicable only in cases where the applicant is a family pensioner).
4. Date of retirement/ date of death of the Government employee
5. Date from which pension/ family pension is being drawn.
6. Pension Payment Order No.(P.P.O. No.)
7. Saving Bank account No. and name of the Bank
8. Age of the pensioner/ family pensioner as on 1.1.1998.

9. As the arrear amount for the period from 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997 in case of
pensioners/ family pensioners who are below the age of 70 years as on 1.1.1998 is
not payable in cash, such pensioners/ family pensioners are required to exercise

option as under.

56
 | hereby opt to receive the arrear of revised pension from 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997
*(a) in sixty equal monthly instalments.
*(b) by credit in General Provident Fund Account
*( Strike out as per option)

Note : In case of pensioner / family pensioner who has given option for crediting the
arrear amount in the G.P.F., the enclosed nomination form may also be filled by the
pensioner / family pensioner and submitted to the pension disbursing authority
alongwith this application.

Witness : Yours faithfully,

( Pensioner )
(Gazetted Officer)

NOTE: One copy to be retained by the Bank and two copies to be forwarded to the
Pension Payment Officer / Treasury Officer alongwith both the halves of PPO. In
case of option for deposit in the General Provident Fund the Pension Payment
Officer/ Treasury Officer shall forward one copy alongwith schedule to Deputy
Director/ Assistant Director, State Insurance and Provident Fund Department.

Nomination Form

nominate

(mention relation)

to receive the amount of GPF in case of my death.

Address : Signature of the
Pensioner/ Family pensioner

Witness

(Gazetted Officer)

57
 "(2) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

The Governor is pleased to order that the Pension/ Family Pension of all the pre-
1.9.1988 service pensioners/ Family pensioners, hereinafter called pre-1988 pensioners/
family pensioners, who were in receipt of pension/ family pension as on 1.9.1996 under
Rajasthan Service Rules as amended from time to time, shall be revised in the manner
indicated in the succeeding paragraphs.

2. Updating of notional emoluments for revision of pension / family pension of
pre- 1.9.1988 retirees/ family pensioners and consolidation of pension :-

In accordance with the provisions contained in Rajasthan Service Rules and the
Government's orders issued thereunder, at present pension of all pre-1988 pensioners/
family pensioners is based on the last emoluments on the date of retirement / date of death
of deceased Government servant, as the case may be. The State Government has decided
that the pension of all the pre-1988 retirees may be updated by notional fixation of their pay
as on 1.9.1988 by adopting the same formula as for the serving employees and thereafter
for the purpose of consolidation of their pension/ family pension as on 1.9.1996, they may
be treated like those who have retired on or after 1.9.1988. In such cases pay shall be fixed
on notional basis in the revised scales of pay introduced from time to time for the post held
by the pensioner at the time of retirement or on the date of death of Government employee.
Pay fixed on notional basis on the first occasion shall be treated as 'pay' for the purpose of
emoluments for re-fixation of pay in the revised scale of pay on the second and subsequent
occasions, if any, and other elements like DA/Adhoc DA/Additional DA, IR etc. based on this
notional pay shall be taken into account, while fixing of pay on notional basis on each
occasion. The pay fixation formulae approved by the Government and other relevant
instructions on the subject in force at the relevant time shall be strictly followed. However,
the benefit of any notional increments or advance increments based on length of service or
selection grades admissible in terms of the rules and instructions applicable at the relevant
time shall not be extended in any case of refixation of pay on notional basis. Special pay or
any other allowance which was treated as part of emoluments for calculation of pension as
per rules applicable at the time of retirement/ death of the Government servant, shall be
treated as part of notional emoluments alongwith notional pay determined as above. On the
basis of notional emoluments as on 1.9.1988, pension shall be calculated as per the
pension formula in force at that time. The pension so worked out shall be consolidated as on
1.9.1996 in accordance with the provisions contained in Finance Department Memorandum
No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998 and shall be treated as basic pension for the
purpose of grant of Dearness Relief on and after 1.9.1996.

3. Calculation of family pension on notional emoluments as on 1.9.1988 and
consolidation thereof :-

In the case of family pension, the notional pay as on 1.9.1988 shall be treated as part
of emoluments last drawn by the deceased Government employee / pensioner and family
pension shall be calculated thereon at the following rates in force as on 1.9.1988. This
family pension shall be consolidated as on 1.9.1996 in accordance with the provisions
contained in Finance Department's Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated
21.3.1998 :-

1. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(5)FD(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

58
 Monthly emoluments Rate of family pension per month

(i) Not exceeding Rs.1500/- 30% of emoluments subject to a minimum
of Rs.300/- and maximum of Rs.400/-.

(ii) Exceeding Rs.1500/- but not | 20% of emoluments subject to a minimum
exceeding Rs.2500/- of Rs.400/-.

(iii) | Exceeding Rs.2,500/- 15% of emoluments subject to a minimum
of Rs.500/- and maximum of Rs.750/-.

4. Extension of provisions of calculation of family pension on_ notional
emoluments at uniform rate of 30% for pre - 1988 pensioners / family
pensioners :-

It has been further decided that w.e.f. 1.9.1996 family pension shall be calculated at
a uniform rate of 30% of emoluments last drawn subject to a minimum of Rs.1275/- and a
maximum of 30% of highest pay in the Government as on 1.9.1996 (the highest pay is Rs.
22,400/-) in all cases instead of slab system. It has also been decided that the benefit of
increased rate of family pension introduced w.e.f. 1.9.1996 may also be extended to pre-
1.9.1996 family pensioners from the same date. Accordingly, in case of pre- 1988
pensioners, family pension as on 1.9.1996 shall be re-calculated at the rate of 30% of the
notional emoluments as determined on 1.9.1988. The additional family pension becoming
due on account of difference between family pension admissible under slab system and at
the rate of 30% of notional emoluments shall be added to the consolidated family pension
worked out in accordance with the provisions of para 3 above.

5. Extension of provisions of calculation of family pension on emoluments at the
uniform rate of 30% for pre-1996 pensioners/ family pensioners :-

In respect of Government servants retired / died during the period from 1.9.1988 to
31.8.1996, the amount of family pension has been worked out on the basis of slab system of
emoluments. Now the family pension, as per decision taken by the Government shall be
30% of last emoluments subject to a minimum of Rs.1275/-. In cases where under the
existing slab system the family pension has been calculated at a rate of less than 30% of
last emoluments, the difference between actual family pension and 30% of last emoluments
shall be treated as additional family pension and shall be added to the consolidated family
pension arrived at in accordance with the provisions contained in Finance Department's
Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998. In other words for retirees during
the period from 1.9.1988 to 31.8.1996, or in case of Government servants who died while in
service during this period, the family pension authorised shall be consolidated as on
1.9.1996, and to this consolidated family pension the additional family pension (amount by
which the initially authorised family pension falls short of 30% of last emoluments) shall be
added to arrive at basic family pension on which dearness relief shall be admissible from

time to time. This has also been illustrated in example given at Annexure - | to this
Memorandum.
6. Total of consolidated family pension plus additional family pension on notional

emoluments shall be basic family pension :-

The total of consolidated family pension plus additional family pension shall be basic
family pension w.e.f. 1.9.1996 and shall be subject to a minimum of Rs.1275/-. Dearness
Relief thereon shall be admissible in accordance with the orders issued from time to time on/
or after 1.9.1996. A few examples of calculation of family pension in the manner prescribed
above are given in Annexure - | to this Memorandum.

59
 7. Updating of family pension where it has not come into operation as pensioners
are/ were alive on 1.9.1996 :-

In the case of existing pre- 1988 pensioners in whose case the family pension has
not come into operation as pensioners are/ were alive as on 1.9.1996, while updating their
pension on the basis of notional emoluments as on 1.9.1988, the family pension shall also
be revised, consolidated and updated, wherever necessary, in terms of these orders and
noted on their Pension Payment Order by the Pension Department. The updated rates of
family pension will apply as and when family pension becomes payable in such cases.
Similar procedure regarding authorising basic family pension as mentioned in para 5 shall
also be followed in respect of pre- 1.9.1996 pensioners.

8. The cases of Government employees who have been permanently absorbed in
Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous Bodies will be regulated as follows :-

a) Where the Government servants on permanent absorption in Public Sector
Undertakings/ Autonomous Bodies continue to draw pension separately from
the Government, the pension of such pensioners as have been absorbed will
also be updated in terms of these orders. Cases of the government servants
who have drawn one time terminal benefits in lump-sum equal to 100% of their
pensions and are entitled to the restoration of one-third commuted portion of
pension shall not, however, be covered by these orders.

b) Orders have been issued by the government from time to time in regard to
entitlement to family pension in case of those government servants who seek
permanent absorption in Public Sector Undertaking/ Autonomous bodies. In
cases where eligible members of the family of the deceased absorbed
employee were in receipt of/ entitled to family pension as on 1.9.1988 in
pursuance of the then existing orders, their family pension will also be revised
in accordance with these orders.

9. Non accrual of arrear :-

No arrear on account of revision of pension/ family pension on notional fixation of
pay will be admissible for the period from 1.9.1996 to 31.12.1996.

10. Deduction of existing commuted portion of pension from the revised pension:-

No commutation will be admissible for the additional amount of pension accruing as
a result of this revision. The existing commuted portion of pension, if any, would continue to
be deducted from the consolidated pension while making monthly disbursement.

11. Existing DCRG entitlement to remain unchanged due to notional fixation of
pay :-

Notional fixation of pay as on 1.9.1988 will not effect DCRG entitlement already
determined and paid with reference to rules in force at the time of retirement/ death of the
Government employee.

12. Adjustment of amount of arrear already paid :-

Arrears if already paid on account of consolidation of pension/ family pension as an
interim measure in the case of pre-1.9.1996 pensioners/ family pensioners (including pre-
1988 pensioner/ family pensioner) in accordance with the provisions contained in Finance
Department Memorandum F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998 shall be adjusted by
Pension Disbursing Authorities against arrears becoming due on the revision of pension/
family pension on the basis of this order.

60
 13. Revision of pension in cases where the Government servant retired /died in
service while drawing pay in UGC pay scales :-

These orders shall also be applicable to pensioners/ family pensioners who retired/
died in service while drawing pay in UGC pay scales. However, in their case for
determination of notional emoluments the date shall be 1.1.1986 instead of 1.9.1988.

14. Procedure for revision of pension/ family pension :-

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

Each pre-1988 pensioner/ family pensioner who was in receipt of pension/
family pension on 1.9.1996 shall be required to apply for revision of his/her
pension/ family pension, as the case may be, in the form as at Annexure- II in
duplicate to the Director or concerned Joint Director of Pension Department by
31.12.1998.

Those who fail to submit their application within the stipulated period will be
deemed to have opted to continue to draw their existing pension/ family
pension. However, any delay in submission of application for revision of
pension will be condoned only with the approval of Finance Department. It will
be in the interest of the pensioner to furnish full details available with him/her,
which may facilitate fixation of his/her pay on notional basis, in the application
submitted by him/her.

In cases where the pensioner/ family pensioner was alive as on 1.9.1996 and
died subsequently, his/her legal heir(s) is/are also entitled to arrears w.e.f.
1.1.1997 till the date of death of pensioner/family pensioner. For this purpose
legal heir(s) may also apply to the Director/ Joint Director, Pension.

The Director Pension/ Joint Director Pension shall scrutinize the application
submitted by the pensioner/ family pensioner and in the case of pre-1988
pensioner/ family pensioners, he will fix his notional pay as required in para 2 of
this Memorandum on the basis fixation tables attached with the respective pay
scales rules.

The Pension Department, where necessary, shall obtain relevant information
from the department from where the Government servant retired or died while
serving in that department. It is possible that service records of some of the
employees are not readily available. In such cases, the pensioner / family
pensioner could be asked to produce copies of relevant orders etc. available
with him/ her indicating the scale of pay of the post held by the Government
servant at the time of retirement/ death as also qualifying service rendered (in
case of pensioner only). However, the onus of verifying the correctness of
records made available by the pensioner shall be with administrative
authorities. In very rare cases, inspite of best efforts, if it is not possible to
revise the pay on notional basis due to non availability of record, the pay of pre-
1988 pensioner/ deceased Government servant could be fixed at the minimum
of the revised pay scale of the post with effect from 1.9.1988.

On the basis of notional emoluments referred in para 2 of this Memorandum,
the Director/ Joint Director of the Pension Department shall calculate the
revised pension as per the formula of calculation of pension in force as on
1.9.1988. Similarly, he will also calculate the family pension at the rates in force
as on 1.9.1988 as required under para 3 of this Memorandum. For notional
fixation of pay service book shall not be required. Notional fixation shall be
done on the basis of last post held by the Government servant and his last pay.

61
 (7)

The pension/ family pension calculated as above will be consolidated in
accordance with the provisions contained in Finance Department Memorandum
No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998. He will also calculate additional
family pension in respect of pre-1988/ pre- 1996 pensioner/ family pensioner as
required in para 4 and 5 of this Memorandum. The additional family pension so
calculated shall be added to the consolidated family pension and total of
consolidated family pension plus additional family pension shall be treated as
basic family pension.

(a)

(c)

The Director/ Joint Director of Pension Department shall issue revised
authority under the existing pension payment order number and send it to
the Treasury Officer/ Pension Payment Officer to whom the original
pension payment order was sent.

In cases where the age of pensioner/ family pensioner as on 1.1.1998 is
70 years and above, the Treasury Officer/ Pension Payment Officer shall,
after making necessary entries in the register of Treasury scroll, forward
the revised pension payment order to the branch of the bank from which
the pensioner/ family pensioner is drawing his/ her pension. The bank
shall make the payment of arrear as well as revised pension as per the
provisions of these orders.

(i) | In other cases where the age of the pensioner/ family pensioner is
less than 70 years as on 1.1.1998, the Treasury Officer / Pension
Payment Officer shall recall the pension payment order from the
bank from which the pension/ family pension is being disbursed.

The Treasury Officer/ Pension Payment Officer shall calculate the
amount of arrear payable to the pensioner on account of revision/
consolidation of pension as per these orders.

(ii) 116 amount of arrear for the period 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997 shall not
be payable in cash. The pensioner/ family pensioner as per the
same provisions contained in Finance Department Memorandum
No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998 shall have option either to
have the arrear amount for the period 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997
deposited in the GPF Accounts or get the arrear amount in 60 equal
monthly instalments. The arrear amount for the period commencing
from 1.1.1998 and preceding the month from which the revised
pension/family pension is paid to the pensions/ family pensions
shall, however, be payable in cash. Thereafter the Treasury Officer/
Pension Payment Officer shall send the original and revised pension
payment orders to the bank for disbursement of pension.”

62
 ANNEXURE - I

EXAMPLES
[No.1 | No.2 | [४०.३ | No.4 |

(i) Date of Retirement 1.10.68 31.12.76 31.1.82 31.7.1996

(ii) | Scale of pay the time of 275-650 750-1350 490-840 2500-4250
retirement

(iii) | Pay last drawn 650 1260 780 3500

(iv) | Pay revised from time to | Revised pay | Revised pay | Revised pay | Revised pay
time scale and scale and scale and scale and

Notional Notional Notional Notional pay
pay fixed pay fixed pay fixed fixed
R.P.S. 76 620-1100 | _ | | | |. |
1070
R.P.S. 81 820-1550 1000-1860 | | |. |
1420 1600
R.P.S. 86 1490-3050 | 1720-3350 880-1680 |_ |
2420 2600 1460
R.P.S. 88 2000-3200 | 2200-4000 950-1680 |. |
2525 2725 1550

(v) | Notional emoluments on 2525 2725 1550 3500

1.9.1988 (In the scale | (In the scale | (In the scale | (In the scale
of 2000- of 2200- of 950- of 2500-
3200) 4000 1680) 4250)

(vi) | Family pension admissible 500 500 400 525 actual
on 1.9.1988 at the rate in
force on that date on
notional emoluments at (v)
above.

(vii) | Consolidated family 1540 1540 1275 1615 actual
pension admissible on
1.9.96 with reference to
notional emoluments (vi)
above in terms of Finance
Department Memorandum
No.F.15(5)FD(Rules)/98
dated 11.6.1998

(viii) | Family pension admissible 758 818 465 1050 actual
on 1.9.96 @ 30% on
notional emoluments as at
(v) above.

(ix) | Additional Family pension 758-500 818-500 465-400 1050-525
admissible = on 1.9.96 =258 =318 =65 =525
(column viii - vi)

(x) | Total Family pension | 1540+258 = | 1540+318= | 1275+65= | 1615+525 =
admissible on 1.9.1996 1798 1858 1340 2140
(column vii+ ix)

63

 To,

ANNEXURE II

APPLICATION FOR CONSOLIDATION/ REVISION OF
PRE - 1.9.1988 PENSION/ FAMILY PENSION

FORM OF APPLICATION
(To be submitted in duplicate)

The Director,
Pension & Pensioners Welfare Department,

Rajasthan,
JAIPUR.
Subject : Revision of pension/ family pension in the case of pre-1988
pensioners/ family pensioners as on 1.9.1996 in terms of Finance
Department Memorandum No.F.15(5)FD(Rules)/98 dated 11th
June, 1998.
Sir,
Kindly revise my pension/ family pension entitlement shown in my PPO (Photo copy
enclosed) in terms of the aforesaid Memorandum. The requisite particulars are given
below :-

ale

*3.

Name of the applicant in block letters and
full postal address

Type of pension admissible

Name of the deceased Government servant/
pensioner in case of family pension

Date of retirement/ date of death of the Government employee
Date from which pension/ family pension is being drawn.
Pension Payment Order (P.P.O.) No.

Department in which the pensioner/
deceased Government servant (pensioner)
served last and the post held by him.

The scale of pay of the post last held and
the last pay drawn.

If any, documentary evidence is being
attached to facilitate determination of
length of qualifying service as also revised
scale of pay for the post last held by the
pensioner/ deceased Government servant
or pensioner, details thereof.

64
 10. # Name of the wife/ husband of the pensioner
11. Saving Bank account No. and name of the Bank
12. Age of the pensioner/ family pensioner as on 1.1.1998.

13. As the arrear amount for the period from
1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997 in case of
pensioners/ family pensioners who are
below the age of 70 years as on 1.1.1998
is not payable in cash, such pensioners/
family pensioners are required to exercise
option as under.

|, hereby opt to receive the arrear of revised pension from 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997-
* (a) in sixty equal monthly instalments.

(b) by credit in General Provident Fund Account.
(Strike out as per option)

कर

**

Note : In case of pensioner / family pensioner who has given option for crediting the arrear
amount in the G.P.F., the enclosed nomination form may also be filled by the
pensioner / family pensioner and submitted to the pension disbursing authority
alongwith this application.

Yours faithfully,

( Pensioner )

# Applicable only in cases where the applicant is a pensioner.
Applicable only in cases where the applicant is a family pensioner.

Nomination Form

(mention relation)

to receive the amount of GPF in case of my death.

Signature of the
Pensioner / Family pensioner

65
 (3) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

The undersigned is directed to refer to para 14(1) of Finance Department's
Memorandum of even number dated 11.6.1998 according to which pre-1988 pensioners/
family pensioners who were in receipt of pension/family pension on 1.9.1996 were required
to apply for revision of their pension/family pension, as the case may be, in the prescribed
form to the Director or concerned Joint Director of Pension Department by 31.12.1998.

It has been brought to the notice of the Government that number of pensioners/
family pensioners could not submit their applications within the above stipulated period for
one or the other reason. Accordingly the matter has been considered and the Governor is
pleased to order to extend the period for submission of application for revision of pension of
pre-1988 pensioners/family pensioners upto 30.6.1999.”

?Note: - The period for submission of application extended from time to time upto
31.12.2004.

3"(4) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

Grant of minimum pension to the pensioners of Covenanting States other than
service pensioners.

There are certain pensioners who were granted various kinds of pension, stipend
and allowance by the Government of the pre-covenanting States prior to formation of
Rajasthan viz : Maintenance allowance, Compensatory Allowance, Khanpan Allowance,
Guzara, Paltu, Pardayat etc. and who were drawing such pension under a Pension Payment
Order issued by the Accountant General. The amount of this pension was revised to Rs.40/-
per month with effect from 1.4.1979 vide Finance Department Order No.F.1(11)FD/(Gr.2)/76
Pt. Il dated 3.4.1979 and again to Rs.100/- per month with effect from 1.12.1992 vide F.D.
Order No.F.1(22)FD(Gr.2)/92 dated 24.12.1992. The temporary increase in pension,
Dearness Relief on pension and enhancement in the minimum pension sanctioned by the
Government from time to time applies only to service pensioners (Civil). The pensioners of
the aforesaid category were neither entitled to the temporary increase in pension nor for
dearness relief on pension and nor for the minimum pension granted by the Government
from time to time to the pensioners (Civil).

The matter has further been considered sympathetically and the Governor is pleased
to order that the minimum pension admissible to the pensioners of Covenanting States other
than service pensioners under Finance Department Order No.F.1(22)FD(Gr.2)/92 dated
24.12.1992 may be revised from Rs.100/- per month to Rs.200/- per month with effect from
1% June, 2000.

These orders shall also apply to the retired employees of the ex-State Banks of pre-
covenanting States viz : Shri Krishna Bank, Bharatpur, Shri Ram Laxman Bank, Duingarpur,
Bundi, Jhalawar State Bank, Jhalawar, Shahpura State Bank, Shahpura, Dholpur State
Bank, Dholpur etc. who were granted pension by Government as a result of their liquidation
or abolition.

This order shall not apply to (i) Political pensioners, (ii) Devasthan pensioners and
(iii) the persons who are in receipt of Khandan allowance under the Tonk State Khandan
Rules, 1944."

1६ Inserted vide FD Order No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 30.1.1999.
2. Vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(5)FD(Rules)/98 dated 7.9.1999, 12.5.2000, 17.11.2000, 15.7.2002, 20.1.2004 and 21.5.2004.
3: Inserted vide FD Order No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/2000 dated 6.6.2000.

66
 (5) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

Attention is invited towards Finance Department Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97
dated 21.3.1998 under which provision has been made regarding non-accrual of arrears of
pensionary benefits for the period of notional revision of pay scale of State Government
employees. The State Government has also revised the pay scales of Government
Polytechnic College Teachers with effect from 1.9.1996 vide Notification
No.F.16(68)Fd(Rules)/98 dated 25.10.2001 with the condition that no arrear of pay and
allowance would accrue to them for the period from 1.9.1996 to 31.12.1998.

Accordingly, the Governor is pleased to order that on the same lines in respect of
Government Polytechnic College Teacher retired/died while in service during the period
1.9.1996 to 31.12.1998, no arrear of pension shall accrue upto 31.12.1998. Pension/Family
pension calculated on pre-revised pay shall only be payable upto 31.12.1998 and the
pension/family pension on revised notional pay shall be payable with effect from 1.1.1999.
The Commutation and Gratuity to these Government Polytechnic College Teachers shall not
be admissible on the revised notional pay, and the amount of Commutation/Gratuity already
paid/payable on the pre-revised pay shall be treated as final.”

26) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

Attention is invited towards Finance Department Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97
dated 21.3.1998 under which provision has been made regarding non-accrual of arrears of
pensionary benefits for the period of notional revision of pay scale of State Government
employees. The State Government has also revised the pay scales of Government
Polytechnic College Librarian and Physical Training Instructor with effect from 1.9.1996 vide
Notification No.F.16(68)FD(Rules)/98 dated 6.10.2003 with the condition that no arrear of
pay and allowances would accrue to them for the period from 1.9.1996 to 31.12.1998

Accordingly, the Governor is pleased to order that on the same lines in respect of
Government Polytechnic College Librarian and Physical Training Instructor retired/died while
in service during the period 1.9.1996 to 31.12.1998, no arrear of pension shall accrue upto
31.12.1998. Pension/Family pension calculated on pre-revised pay shall only be payable
upto 31.12.1998 and the pension/family pension on revised notional pay shall be payable
with effect from 1.1.1999. The Commutation and Gratuity to these Government Polytechnic
College Librarian and Physical Training Instructor shall not be admissible on the revised
notional pay, and the amount of Commutation/Gratuity payable on the pre-revised pay shall
be treated as final and any amount paid due to revision of pay scale under the Rajasthan
Civil Services (Revised Pay Scales) Rules, 1998 shall be recoverable from the amount of
revised pension in easy instalments.”

3"(7) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

In compliance of the order of Hon'ble Supreme Court in its Judgement dated
21.3.2002 read with order dated 17-1-2005 the Governor is pleased to order that-

dy Retirement benefits to Judicial Officers shall be allowed as under :-

(a) Age of Superannuation - The age of superannuation of Judicial Officers shall
be as at present until further orders in this behalf are issued in the light of the
directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its Order dated 21.3.2002 in Writ
Petition No. 1022/1989.

(b) Qualifying service for earning full pension continues to be 33 years.

Inserted vide FD Order No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 25.10.2001.
Inserted vide FD Order No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 6.10.2003.
Inserted vide FD Order No.F.13(8)FD(Rules)/02 dated 18.5.2005.

eno

67
 (9)

Last pay drawn shall continue to be taken as emoluments for purpose of
pension. The State Pension Rules shall continue to apply for calculation of
pension.

Commutation of pension shall be 50% of the pension with restoration after 15
years.

There is no ceiling for maximum pension.

The payment of DCRG and retirement Gratuity continue to be as
per State Rules.

Family pension shall be determined as per State Rules.

The aforesaid provisions will come into force with effect from 1.7.1996 and will be
applicable to Judicial Officers who have retired or ceased to be in service due to death or
retirement on or after 1.7.1996, but shall not be applicable to judicial officers appointed to
service on or after 1-1-2004.

2. Pension Structure for the past pensioners retired prior to 1-7-1996 :-

(a)

The revised pension/family pension of the Judicial Officers who have retired
or died while in service prior to 1.7.1996 shall constitute the following:-

(i) Basic pension/family pension as on 1.7.1996.

(ii) Dearness Relief as on 1.1.1996 sanctioned vide FD Order No.
F.1(25)FD(Gr.2)/93 dated 7.5.1996.

(iii) Interim Relief | & Il sanctioned vide FD Order No. F.1(14)FD/Rules/95
dated 17.8.1995.

(iv) Fitment Weightage 40% of basic pension/family pension

The consolidated revised pension calculated above shall not be less than
50% of the minimum of the revised pay of the post held by the Judicial
Officers at the time of retirement who have put in full qualifying service at the
time of retirement. In respect of Judicial Officers who have put in less than
the full qualifying service there shall be proportionate reduction.

(b) The Dearness Relief shall be at the rates as are admissible to serving
Judicial Officers.
(c) The revision in pension shall come into effect from 1.7.1996 and will be
applicable to Judicial Officers who have retired or ceased to be in service due
to death or retirement prior to 1.7.1996.
3. To the above extent the relevant provisions of RCS (Pension) Rules, 1996 and RCS

(Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996 shall stand modified in respect of Judicial Officers
appointed to service on or before 31-12-2003.”

(8) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

The Governor is pleased to order that the existing para 2(b) of Finance Department
order No.F.13(8)FD(Rules)/2002 dated 18.5.2005 may be deleted and existing para 3 may
be renumbered as para 4 and following may be inserted as new para 3: -

"3.

The Dearness Relief shall be at the rates as are admissible to serving
Judicial Officers.”

This order shall come into force with effect from 1.7.1996.”

1. Inserted vide FD Order No.F.13(8)FD(Rules)/02 dated 10.04.2006.

68
 B — RETIREMENT / DEATH GRATUITY

55. Retirement/Death Gratuity

(1) (a) A Government servant, who has completed five years qualifying service
and has become eligible for service gratuity or pension under Rule 54
shall, on his retirement, be granted retirement gratuity equal to one-fourth
of his emoluments for each completed six monthly period of qualifying
service, subject to a maximum of 16% times the emoluments.

(b) If a Government servant dies while in service, the death gratuity shall be
paid to his family in the manner indicated in sub rule (1) of rule 56 at the
rates given in the Table below, namely :-

TABLE
Length of qualifying service Rate of death gratuity
(i) Less than 1 year 2 times of emoluments
(ii) One year or more but less 6 times of emoluments
than 5 years
(iii) 5 years or more but less 12 times of emoluments
than 20 years
(iv) 20 years or more Half of emoluments for every

completed six monthly period
of qualifying service subject
to a maximum of 33 times of
emoluments

Provided that the amount of retirement gratuity or death gratuity payable under this
rule shall in no case exceed "3.5 lacs rupees":

Provided further that where the amount of retirement or death gratuity as finally
calculated contains a fraction of a rupee, it shall be rounded off to the next higher rupee.

(2) If a Government servant, who has become eligible for a service gratuity or
pension, dies within five years from the date of his retirement from service including
compulsory retirement as a penalty and the sums actually received by him at the time of his
death on account of such gratuity or pension, together with the retirement gratuity
admissible under sub rule (1) and the commuted value of any portion of pension commuted
by him are less than the amount equal to 12 times of his emoluments, a residuary gratuity
equal to the deficiency may be granted to his family in the manner indicated in sub rule (1)
Rule 56.

(3) The emoluments for the purpose of gratuity admissible under this rule shall be
reckoned in accordance with rule 45.

(4) For the purpose of this rule and rules 56, 58 and 59 ‘family’ in relation to a
Government servant, means -

(i) wife or wives including judicially separated wife or wives in the case of a male
Government servant,

1. The existing figures and words "2.5. lacs rupees" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.98 w.e.f. 1.1.1997.

69
 (ii) husband, including judicially separated husband in the case of a female
Government servant,

(iii) sons including stepsons and adopted sons,
(iv) unmarried daughters including step daughters and adopted daughters,
(v) widowed daughters including step daughters and adopted daughters,

(vi) father, | including adoptive parents in the case
of individuals whose personal law
(vii) | mother, | permits adoption,

(viii) | brothers below the age of eighteen years including step brothers,
(ix) unmarried sisters & widowed sisters including step sisters,
(x) married daughters, and

(xi) children of a predeceased son.
GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Benefits admissible in cases of suicide also

The Pension Rules do not prohibit the grant of family pension/death gratuity to the
family of a Government servant who commits suicide.

2. The entire service rendered by a Government servant which qualifies for pension
also qualifies for Death/Retirement Gratuity. Thus the benefit of rounding off qualifying
service of three months and above into a completed six monthly period is applicable in the
case of Retirement/Death Gratuity also.

3. Determination of Death Gratuity when service records are incomplete

(i) If the deceased Government servant had, at the time of death, rendered more
than five years qualifying service but less than twenty years qualifying service, and the spell
of last five years service has been verified and accepted by the Head of Office, the amount
of death gratuity shall be equal to 12 times of deceased Government servant’s emoluments,
as indicated in clause (b) of sub rule (1) of rule 55. Where the verified and accepted service
is less than five years of qualifying service, the amount of death gratuity shall be equal to
twice or six times of his emoluments, as indicated in clause (b) of sub rule (1) of rule 55.

(ii) If the deceased Government servant had rendered more than twenty years of
service and the entire service is not capable of being verified and accepted, but the service
for the last five years has been verified and accepted under sub clause (i), the family of the
deceased Government servant shall be allowed on provisional basis the death gratuity equal
to 12 times of emoluments. Final amount of the gratuity shall be determined by the Head of
Office on the basis of the entire spell of service which may be verified and accepted by the
Head of Office within a period of six months from the date on which the authority for the
payment of provisional gratuity was issued. The balance, if any, becoming payable as a
result of determination of the final amount of death cum retirement gratuity shall then be
authorised to the beneficiary or beneficiaries.

4. Retirement/death gratuity may be paid to the family after one year, in case
an official’s where abouts are not known

Where family pension has been sanctioned in case of a missing Government
servant, after observing the formalities, as mentioned in 2nd proviso to rule 61, the family
may also be paid/granted-

70
 (i) Death gratuity not exceeding the amount which would have been payable as
Retirement gratuity if the person had retired. The difference between retirement gratuity and
death gratuity shall be, subsequently, payable after the death is conclusively established or
on the expiry of seven years period from the date of missing.

(ii) Amount of -
(a) salary due,
(b) leave encashment due,
(c) G.P.F. having regard to the nomination made by the employee.

The Head of Office will assess all Government dues outstanding against the
Government servant and ensure recovery in accordance with rule 92 of R.C.S. (Pension)
Rules, 1996, and other instructions in force for effecting recovery of Government dues. The
Head of office will record details of all payments made to the family in the service book to
avoid double payment in case Government servant reappears.

56. Persons to whom gratuity is payable

(1) (9) The gratuity payable under rule 55 shall be paid to the person or persons
on whom the right to receive the gratuity is conferred by means of a
nomination under Rule 59.

(b) If there is no such nomination or if the nomination made does not subsist,
the gratuity shall be paid in the manner indicated below -

(i) if there are one or more surviving members of the family as in clause
(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of sub rule (4) of rule 55, to all such members in
equal shares;

(ii) if there are no such surviving members of the family as in sub clause
(i) above, but there are one or more members as in clauses (v), (vi),
(vii), (viii), (ix), (x) and (xi) of sub rule (4) of rule 55 to all such
members in equal shares.

(2) If a Government servant dies after retirement without receiving the gratuity
admissible under sub rule (1) of rule 55, the gratuity shall be disbursed to the family in the
manner indicated in sub rule (1).

(3) The right of a female member of the family, or that of a brother, of a Government
servant who dies while in service or after retirement, to receive the share of gratuity shall not
be affected if the female member marries or remarries, or the brother attains the age of
eighteen years, after the death of the Government servant and before receiving her or his
share of the gratuity.

(4) Where gratuity is granted under Rule 55 to a minor member of the family of the
deceased Government servant, it shall be payable to the guardian on behalf of the minor.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Payment of minor’s share of death/retirement gratuity to guardian

(1) Payment of the minor(s)’ share of death/retirement gratuity is to be made to the
natural guardian of the minor(s), and in the absence of a natural guardian, to the person
who furnishes a guardianship certificate.

71
 (2) In a case where payment of the minor(s)’ share of death/retirement gratuity is to
be made to the natural/legal guardian, in order to issue the necessary payment authority in
his/her favour, the Director, Pension Department must know this fact, as well as the name of
the natural/legal guardian. If the above information is not given in the sanction letter, the
Director, Pension Department has to make enquiries on this point from the sanctioning
authority, resulting in avoidable delay in the payment of death/retirement gratuity. To obviate
such delays, the sanctioning authority should in future in all cases of this nature intimate the
aforesaid particulars in the sanction letter itself.

(3) The legal position as to whom the share of a minor in the capacity of minor's
natural/legal guardian would be payable is explained as under-

(1) Where no valid nomination subsists:

(a) When a share is payable to minor sons or minor unmarried daughters, it
should be paid to the surviving parent except in the case when the surviving
parent happens to be a Muslim lady. Where, however, there is no surviving
parent, or the surviving parent is a Muslim lady, payment will have to be
made to the person producing the guardianship certificate.

(b) When a share is payable to widowed minor daughter(s), production of a
guardianship certificate would be necessary.

(c) If in a rare case the wife herself happens to be a minor, the death/retirement
gratuity payable to her shall be paid to the person producing the guardianship
certificate.

(d) When the death/retirement gratuity becomes payable to a minor brother or a
minor unmarried sister, the payment should be made to the father or, in his
absence the mother of the beneficiary except in a case where the mother
happens to be a Muslim lady. In this case too, if there is no surviving parent
or the surviving parent happens to be a Muslim lady, the payment will have to
be made to the person producing the guardianship certificate. If any share is
payable to a widowed minor sister the production of guardianship certificate
would be necessary.

(2) Where a valid nomination subsists:

(a) Where the nomination is in respect of one or more of the members of the
family, the position stated against para (3)(1) would apply.

(b) Where there is no family, the nomination in favour of an illegitimate child or
married sister would also be valid. The position would, therefore, be as
follows:-

(i) If the nominee is an illegitimate child, the share will be payable to the
mother, and in her absence, the production of a guardianship
certificate would be necessary.

(ii) If the share is payable to a married girl, the share will be payable to
the husband.

Note - A surviving stepmother is not a natural guardian of the minor child, and is not,
therefore, covered by the term ‘surviving parent’ used in para (3)(1) (a) above.

2. Special relaxation for payment of minor’s share without guardianship
certificate, up to the extent of Rs.10,000.

(1) Decision No. 1 lays down that the payment of a minor’s share of death/retirement
gratuity is to be made to the person producing a guardianship certificate when there is no
surviving parent or the surviving parent is a Muslim lady. It has been represented that in
many cases, the production of guardianship certificate causes great inconvenience and
entails delays in the settlement of the claims.

72
 (2) It has been decided in modification of the above decision that payment of
death/retirement gratuity to the extent of Rs.10,000 (or the first Rs.10,000 where the amount
payable exceeds Rs.10,000) in favour of a minor may be made to his/her guardian, in the
absence of a natural guardian, without the production of a formal guardianship certificate but
subject to the production of an indemnity bond with suitable sureties to the satisfaction of the
sanctioning authority. The balance in excess of Rs. 10,000, if any, would become payable
on the production of a certificate of guardianship.

(3) It is essential, however, that there should be adequate prima facie grounds for
making payment as in paragraph (2) above, to the person claiming it. Such ground can exist
only if he is shown by a sworn declaration to be a de facto guardian and his bonafides have
been ascertained. Even if a guardian has not yet been appointed by the Court, if the minor
and his property are in the custody of some person, such person is in law a de facto
guardian. The authorities making the payment should, therefore, require the person who
comes forward to claim payment on behalf of the minor, to satisfy them by an affidavit that
he is in charge of the property of the minor and is looking after it or that, if the minor has no
property other than the gratuity, the minor is in his custody and care. The affidavit so to be
produced is in addition to the indemnity bond with suitable sureties.

(4) The indemnity bond which is to be required to be produced by a de facto
guardian of minor(s) for payment of death/retirement gratuity to the extent of Rs.10,000
should be executed in the form appended below.

(5) It has been decided that the stamp duty payable on the indemnity bond will be
borne by the Government. The indemnity bond should, therefore, be executed on any
durable plain paper.

(6) The indemnity bond should be signed by the obligor and the surety/sureties or
their respective attorneys appointed by power(s) of attorney. The indemnity bond on behalf
of the Governor should be accepted by an officer duly authorised under Article 299 (1) of the
Constitution.

73
 INDEMNITY BOND

KNOW ALL MEN by these presents that we (8)................. eee (0).....................--
the widow/son/brother, etc. of (C)........... deceased, resident of............ (hereinafter called
“the Obligor’) and (d).......... son/wife/daughter of ........... resident of........ and .......
son/wife/daughter of ........... resident of .......... the sureties for and on behalf of the Obligor
(hereinafter called “the Sureties”) are held firmly bound to the Governor of Rajasthan
(hereinafter called “the Government”) in the sum of Rs.......... (Rupees........ only) well and
truly to be paid to the Government on demand and without a demur for which payment we
bind ourselves and our respective heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives,
successors and assigns by these presents.

Signed this ........ day of......... one thousand nine hundred 310 ..............

WHEREAS (०) ........... was at the time of his death in the employment of the
Government/receiving a pension at the rate of Rs. ......... (Rupees....... only) per month from
the Government.

AND WHEREAS the said (०) ........ died on the ....... Gay 0 ......... Vas and there
was due to him at the time of his death the sum of Rs........ (Rupees....... only) for and

towards share of his minor son/daughter in the death/retirement gratuity.

AND WHEREAS the Obligor claims to be entitled to the said sum as de facto
guardian of the minor son/daughter of the said (c)......... but has not obtained till the date of
these presents the certificate of guardianship from any competent court of law in respect of
the said minor(s).

AND WHEREAS the Obligor has satisfied the (e) ........ that he/she is entitled to the
aforesaid sum and that it would cause undue delay and hardship if the Obligor be required
to produce the certificate of guardianship from the competent court of law before payment to
him of the said sum of २३.................

AND WHEREAS the Government has no objection to the payment of the said sum to
the Obligor but under Government Rules and Orders, it is necessary for the Obligor to first
execute a bond with one surety/two sureties to indemnify the Government against all claims
to the amount so due as aforesaid to the said (c)............ before the said sum can be paid to
the Obligor.

AND WHEREAS the Obligor and at his/her request the surety/sureties have agreed
to execute the bond in the terms and manner hereinafter contained.

NOW THE CONDITION OF THIS BOND is such that if after payment has been
made to the Obligor, the Obligor and/or the surety/sureties shall in the event of a claim being
made by any other person against the Government with respect to the aforesaid sum of
Rs....... refund to the Government the said sum of Rs......... and shall otherwise indemnify
and keep the Government harmless and indemnified against and from all liabilities in
respect of the aforesaid sum and all costs incurred in consequence of the claim thereto
THEN the above written bond or obligation shall be void and of no effect but otherwise it
shall remain in full force, effect and virtue.

AND THESE PRESENTS ALSO WITNESS that the liability of the sureties hereunder
shall not be impaired or discharged by reason of time being granted by or any forbearance
act or omission of the Government whether with or without the knowledge or consent of the
surety/sureties in respect of or in relation to the obligations or conditions to be performed or
discharged by the Obligor or by any other method or thing whatsoever which under the law
relating to sureties, shall but for this provision have the effect of so relating the
surety/sureties, from such liability nor shall it be necessary for the Government to sue the

74
 Obligor before suing the surety/sureties or either of them for the amount due hereunder,
and the Government agrees to bear the stamp duty, if any, chargeable on these presents.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Obligor and the surety/sureties hereto have set and
subscribed their respective hands hereunto on the day, month and year above written.

Signed by the above named ‘Obligor’ in the presence of

Accepted for and on beheld of the Governor of Rajasthan by

[Name and designation of the Officer directed or authorised, in pursuance of Article 299(1) of the
Constitution, to accept the bond for and on behalf of the Governor] in the presence of

(Name and designation of witness)

NOTE I.- (a) Full name of the claimant referred to as the ‘Obligor’.
(b) State relationship of the Obligor to the deceased.
(c) Name of the deceased Government Officer.

(d) Full name or names of the sureties with the name or names of the
father(s)/husband(s) and place of residence.

(e) Designation of the officer responsible for payment.

NOTE II. - The Obligor as well as the sureties should have attained majority so that the
bond may have legal effect or force.

57. Debarring a person from receiving gratuity

(1) If a person who in the event of death of a Government servant while in service is
eligible to receive gratuity in terms of Rule 56 is charged with the offence of murdering the
Government servant or for abetting in the commission of such an offence, his claim to
receive his share of gratuity shall remain suspended till the conclusion of the criminal
proceedings instituted against him.

(2) If on the conclusion of the criminal proceedings referred to in sub-rule (1), the
person concerned -

(a) is convicted for the murder or abetting in the murder of the Government
servant, he shall be debarred from receiving his share of gratuity which shall
be payable to other eligible members of the family, if any,

(b) is acquitted of the charge of murdering or abetting in the murder of the
Government servant, his share of gratuity shall be payable to him.

(3) The provisions of sub rule (1) and sub rule (2) shall also apply to the undisbursed
gratuity referred to in sub rule (2) of rule 56.

75
 58. Lapse of retirement gratuity/death gratuity

Where a Government servant dies while in service or after retirement without
receiving the amount of gratuity and leaves behind no family and -

(a)
(b)

has made no nomination, or

the nomination made by him does not subsist, the amount of retirement
gratuity/death gratuity payable in respect of such Government servant under
rule 55 shall lapse to the Government:

Provided that the Government may grant the gratuity to any person who was
dependent on the deceased Government servant of support, if such a course
is considered justified on compassionate grounds.

Provided further that the amount of death gratuity/retirement gratuity shall be
payable to the person in whose favour a Succession Certificate in respect of
the gratuity in question has been granted by a Court of Law.

59. Nominations

(1) A Government servant shall, on his initial confirmation in a service or post, make
a nomination in Form 1 or Form 2 as the case may be, conferring on one or more persons
the right to receive the retirement gratuity/death gratuity payable under rule 55.

Provided that if at the time of making the nomination -

(i)
(ii)

the Government servant has a family, the nomination shall not be in favour of
any person or persons other than the members of his family; or

the Government servant has no family, the nomination may be made in
favour of a person or persons, or a body of individuals, whether incorporated
or not.

(2) If a Government servant nominates more than one person under sub rule (1), he
shall specify in the nomination the amount of share payable to each of the nominees, in
such manner as to cover the entire amount of gratuity.

(3) A Government servant may provide in the nomination -

(i)

(ii)

that in respect of any specified nominee who predeceases the Government
servant, or who dies after the death of the Government servant but before
receiving the payment of gratuity, the right conferred on that nominee shall
pass to such other person as may be specified in the nomination:

Provided that if at the time of making the nomination the Government servant
has a family consisting of more than one member, the person so specified
shall not be a person other than a member of his family:

Provided further that where a Government servant has only one member in
his family, and a nomination has been made in his favour, it is open to the
Government servant to nominate alternate nominee or nominees in favour of
any person or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not;

that the nomination shall become invalid in the event of the happening of the
contingency provided therein.

(4) The nomination made by a Government servant who has no family at the time of
making it, or the nomination made by a Government servant under the second proviso to
clause (i) of sub rule (3) where he has only one member in his family shall become invalid in
the event of the Government servant subsequently acquiring a family, or an additional
member in the family, as the case may be.

76
 (5) A Government servant may, at any time, cancel a nomination by sending a notice
in writing to the Head of Office:

Provided that he shall, along with such notice, send a fresh nomination made in
accordance with these rules.

(6) Immediately on the death of a nominee in respect of whom no special provision
has been made in the nomination under clause (i) of sub rule (3) or on the occurrence of any
event by reason of which the nomination becomes invalid in pursuance of clause (ii) of that
sub rule, the Government servant shall send to the Head of Office a notice in writing
cancelling the nomination together with a fresh nomination made in accordance with this
rule.

(7) (a) Every nomination made including every notice of cancellation, if any, given by
a Government servant under this rule, shall be sent to the Head of Office.

(b) The Head of Office shall, immediately on receipt of such nomination
countersign it indicating the date of receipt and keep it under his custody:

Provided that the Head of Office may authorise his subordinate Gazetted
Officers to countersign nomination forms of non-gazetted Government
servants.

(c) Suitable entry regarding receipt of nomination shall be made in the service
book of the Government servant concerned.

(8) Every nomination made, and every notice of cancellation given, by a Government
servant shall, to the extent that it is valid, take effect from the date on which it is received by
the Head of Office.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Importance of nomination and their safe custody

Nomination for death/retirement gratuity etc. and related notices are important
documents on the basis of which the claims of the beneficiaries have to be established and
settled. Instance of cases have come to notice where nominations made by deceased
officers and related papers were not traceable in the official records of the Head of the
Office and were treated as lost. This defeats the very purpose underlying nominations and
causes inconveniences and delay all round. To obviate the possibility of such losses in
future, it has been decided that the nomination papers should after countersignature, be
kept in separate confidential file which should be lodged for safe keeping with the Head of
the Office or other responsible officer nominated by him for this purpose, and a clear note
made in the service book of the officer as to what nominations and related notices have
been received from him and where they have been lodged for safe custody, so that there
should be no difficulty in locating the documents when the occasion for making a reference
to them arises.

2. All Government servants are advised that it would be in the interest of their
nominees if they would preserve copies of the nominations made by them and of the related
notices and acknowledgements, either in their personal custody or in safe deposit along with
their other important personal documents, etc. where they may be expected to come into the
possession of the beneficiaries in the event of their death.

3. Where a Will is made by a Government servant and it expressly authorises a
person in the absence of the members of his family to receive Retirement/Death Gratuity
and is filed by the Government servant concerned in the department during his life time,
then such a Will amounts to nomination for purpose of payment of Retirement/Death gratuity
and accordingly Retirement/Death Gratuity is payable to such a person.

77
 4. In order to avoid any legal complications that might arise it is hereby notified for
information of all concerned that only the certified copies of nominations for
Retirement/Death Gratuity may be sent to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
with the pension papers, the original being retained in the office of issue.

5. According to Rule 59, a Government servant shall make nomination for
retirement/death gratuity on his initial confirmation in service and not necessarily on
completion of five years qualifying service making him eligible for retirement/death gratuity. It
is clear that the nomination must be made by the Government servant while he is holding an
office and is in service. As a pensioner cannot after his retirement be said to be holding an
office, any nomination made by him after retirement is not valid. The payment of
retirement/death gratuity in such cases should, therefore, be made to the surviving members
of the family or the deceased Government servant in the manner provided in rule 56 (1) (b)
and not to the nominee or nominees.

78
 C. FAMILY PENSION RULES
60. Applicability

The provisions of these rules shall apply to all Government servants on pensionable
establishment, whether temporary or permanent, who are in service on the ist day of
October, 1996, or who enter service on or after that date, but shall not apply to -

a
b
०
d

persons paid from contingencies;
work charged staff;
casual labour; and

(
(
(
(

wa SS SS

persons appointed on contract.
61. Admissibility of pension

Family pension on the rates specified in Rule 62 shall be granted, under these rules,
to the family of a government servant who dies on or after the 1st October, 1996 -

(a) While in service, after completion of one year of continuous service, provided
that in the following cases, the condition of one year’s service will not be

applicable:
(i) Persons appointed as probationers against permanent posts,
(ii) Persons recruited, through Rajasthan Public Service Commission for

appointment on temporary posts within their purview,

(iii) Persons recruited strictly in accordance with service rules in case of
temporary posts outside the purview of the Rajasthan Public Service
Commission .

NOTE : ”Continuous service” for the purpose of these Rules, means service
rendered in a temporary or permanent capacity in a pensionable
establishment but does not include:

(i) the period of service, if any, rendered before attaining the age of
eighteen years, and

(ii) the period of suspension, if any.
The continuous service will not include broken periods of service.

(b) After retirement from service, if he was in receipt of pension on the date of
death, other than pension referred to in rule 33:

Provided that if a pensioner after retirement from service, is unheard of for more than
a period of one year and the service pension has also remained undrawn by the pensioner,
the family pension at the rate prescribed under rule 62 subject the maximum limit of service
pension sanctioned to the Government servant shall be sanctioned and authorised to the
member of his/her family as defined under rule 66 (1) on submission of an application
alongwith Indemnity Bond and Affidavit in the prescribed forms 15, 15A and 15B alongwith a
copy of F.I.R. lodged with the police about the disappearance of the pensioner. If in any
case, the pensioner subsequently reappears, the family pension shall immediately cease to
be admissible and payable and the amount so paid shall be adjusted out of arrears of
service pension, if paid to the pensioner:

79
 CLARIFICATION

Under Rule 35, 38 and 42 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 a
Government servant with less than 10 years of qualifying service can be retired on invalid
pension, compensation pension and compulsory retirement pension respectively.

Under Rule 3(p) of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 ‘Pension’
includes gratuity except when the term pension is used in contradistinction to gratuity and
under Rule 3(k)(i) ‘Gratuity’ includes service gratuity.

A doubt has been raised regarding the applicability of provisions of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 whether a Government servant who is retired under Rule
35, 38 and 42 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 with less then 10 years of
qualifying service is entitled to pension or service gratuity.

In this regard the relevant provisions as contained in Rule 122(3)(b) of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 are reproduced below: -

“If the employee eligible for disability pension under these Rules is invalided/boarded

out from service before putting in ten years service, he does not get any invalid

pension but gets only service gratuity under the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.”

Accordingly it is clarified that in any kind of retirement with less than 10 years of
qualifying service only service gratuity shall be admissible under Rule 54(1) of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 and in such cases on the death of a retired
Government servant, no family pension shall be payable to the family of the deceased
retired Government servant under provisions contained in Rule 61(b) of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.”

NOTE

With regard to payment of arrears of service pension on reappearance of pensioner
or otherwise, refer to rule 144 and 146 respectively.

Provided further that if a Government servant is unheard of for more than a period of
one year, the family pension at the rate prescribed under rule 62 shall be sanctioned and
authorised to the member of his/her family as defined under Rule 66(1) on submission of an
application alongwith Indemnity Bond and Affidavit in the prescribed forms 16, 16A and 16B
and also a copy of the F.I.R. lodged with the police about the disappearance of the
Government servant. If in any case, the Government servant subsequently reappears the
family pension shall immediately cease to be admissible and payable. The amount of family
pension already paid to the family, shall be recoverable from the salary of the Government
servant. The cases in which officials disappear after committing frauds, the family pension
needs to be sanctioned only on the Government employee being acquitted by the Court of
Law or after conclusion of disciplinary proceedings etc. as the case may be.

Notes (1) The family pension granted under first and second provisos to rule 61, shall
be payable from the date of expiry of one year period of a missing
pensioner/Government servant or from the date of lodging of F.I.R.,
whichever is later.

(2) Regarding arrears of family pension, see rule 146 and 147.

(3) Regarding payment of other retirement benefits or dues of a missing Govt.
servant, see Government of Rajasthan’s Decision below rule 55.

1. Inserted vide FD Clarification No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/97 dated 23.03.2007

80
 62.

Amount of family pension
i) Family pension shall be admissible @ 30% of ?"emoluments” subject to a
minimum of Rs.1275/- per month and maximum of 30% of the highest pay in
Government *[(the highest pay in the Government is Rs.24,850/- since
1.7.1996)]."

(ii) (a)

(b)

Where a Government servant who is not governed by the Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923 as amended from time to time dies while in
service after having rendered not less than 7 years continuous service
prior to his death, the family pension payable shall be at 50% of the
emoluments last drawn or twice the amount of family pension admis-
sible under sub rule (i) whichever is less.

Where a Government servant who is governed by the Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923 as amended from time to time dies while in
service after having rendered not less than 7 years continuous service
prior to his death, the family of such a Government servant shall also
be entitled to the family pension equal to 50% of the pay last drawn or
one and a half times the family pension admissible under sub rule (i),
whichever is less:

Provided that where compensation is not payable to a
Government servant under the aforesaid Act, the pension sanctioning
authority shall send a certificate to the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan to the effect that the family of the deceased Government
servant is not eligible for any compensation under the aforesaid Act
and in such a case the family of such a Government servant shall be
entitled to family pension as admissible in sub rule (ii) (a).

(iii) The amount of family pension at enhanced rates under sub rule (ii) in respect
of Government servants who retired/retire on or after 1st October, 1996 or
died/die while in service on or after 1st October, 1996, shall be payable:-

(a)

(b)

in the event of death of a Government servant while in service for a
period of seven years following the date of death or till the date on
which the deceased Government servant would have attained the age
of 65 years had he survived, whichever period is shorter;

Where a Government servant who is governed by the Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923 as amended from time to time dies while in
service after having rendered not less than 7 years continuous service
prior to his death, the family of such a Government servant shall also
be entitled to the family pension equal to 50% of the pay last drawn or
one and a half times the family pension admissible under sub rule (i),
whichever is less:

1.

2.
3

The existing clause "(i) of Rules 62 " substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.
"(i) The amount of family pension admissible under these rules will be as follows :-

Monthly emoluments of Rate of family pension
Government servant per month
(a) Not exceeding Rs.1500. 30% of emoluments subject to a
minimum of Rs.300.
(b) Exceeding Rs.1500 20% of emoluments subject to a
but not exceeding minimum of Rs.450.
Rs.3000.
(c) Exceeding Rs.3000. 15% of emoluments subject to a

minimum of Rs.600 and maximum of Rs.1250."

The existing words "basic pay" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 11.6.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.
The existing words and figures "(the highest pay in the Government is Rs.22,400/- since 1.9.1996)” substituted vide FD Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 20.4.2004 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.

81
 Provided that where compensation is not payable to a
Government servant under the aforesaid Act, the pension sanctioning
authority shall send a certificate to the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan to the effect that the family of the deceased Government
servant is not eligible for any compensation under the aforesaid Act
and in such a case the family of such a Government servant shall be
entitled to family pension as admissible in sub rule (ii) (a).

(iii) The amount of family pension at enhanced rates under sub rule (ii) in respect
of Government servants who retired/retire on or after 1st October, 1996 or
died/die while in service on or after 1st October, 1996, shall be payable:-

(a) in the event of death of a Government servant while in service for a
period of seven years following the date of death or till the date on
which the deceased Government servant would have attained the age
of 65 years had he survived, whichever period is shorter;

(b) in the event of death after retirement, the family pension at the
enhanced rates indicated in clause (ii) shall be payable till the date on
which the deceased government servant would have attained the age
of 65 years, had he survived, or for seven years, whichever period is
shorter, but in no case the amount of family pension shall exceed the
pension sanctioned to the Government servant at the time of
retirement. However, in cases where the amount of family pension as
admissible under sub rule (i) exceeds the pension sanctioned at the
time of retirement, the amount of family pension sanctioned under this
clause shall be the amount of family pension admissible under sub
rule (i). The pension sanctioned at the time of retirement shall be the
pension inclusive of the part of pension which the retired Government
servant may have commuted before death; and

(c) after the expiry of the period referred to in clause (a) and (b) above,
the pension payable will be at rates laid down in sub rule (i).

™(iv) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (ii) and (iii), the amount of
family pension in the case of parent shall be as admissible in clause (i)."

NOTES

(1) In the case of a Government servant who dies while on extension of service, the
date upto which the extension of service had been sanctioned to him before his death, will
be deemed to be the normal date of superannuation.

(2) The amount of Family Pension shall be fixed at monthly rates and be expressed
in whole rupees and where the family pension contains a fraction of a rupee, it shall be
rounded off to the next higher rupee.

(3) The commutation of pension by a pensioner has no effect on the quantum of
family pension.

1. Inserted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 8.8.2000. These rules shall be deemed to have come into force with immediate
effect. It shall also be applicable to the cases pertaining to the period before issue of this notification but with immediate effect. The past
cases decided otherwise need not be re-opened but hence forth they will be regulated in accordance with the provisions amended by this
notification.

82
 (1) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

Grant of Exgratia Payment to widows of deceased contributory Provident Fund
Retirees.

The undersigned is directed to invite attention towards FD Memorandum
No.F.1(35)FD(Gr.2)/87 dated 2.7.1991 and 2.7.1992 vide which alive widows of Jodhpur
CPF retirees / beneficiaries who died while in service were granted Exgratia payment at the
rate of 150/- per month plus Dearness Relief as may be sanctioned from time to time.
Besides this, these widows of CPF retirees were also allowed first, second and third Interim
Relief Allowed to the State Pensioners.

Consequent upon revision of pay scales of the State Government employees the
pension of the State Pensioners Family Pensioners have been consolidated and they are
being allowed payment of Dearness Relief at the revised rates on consolidated pension.

Accordingly, the Governor is pleased to order that the Exgratia payment admissible
to the aforesaid widows may be consolidated to Rs.572/- by mergings the amount of
Exgratia payment, Dearness Relief thereon at the rate in force as on 1.1.1996 plus amount
of first, second and third Interim Relief. On this consolidated amount of Exgratia payment.
Dearness Relief as may be sanctioned from time to time to the State Pensioners shall be
admissible to them. This order shall deemed to have come into force with effect from
1.7.1997."

"(2) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

The undersigned is directed to say that in accordance with the provisions contained
in Finance Department Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998, the family
pension, w.e.f. 1.9.1996, shall be calculated at a uniform rate of 30% of basic pay in all
cases instead of slab system and shall be subject to a minimum of Rs. 1275/- per month
and a maximum of 30% of the highest pay in the Government (the highest pay in the
Government is Rs. 22400/- since 1.9.1996). It has been decided by the Government that the
benefit of the aforesaid enhanced rate of family pension may also be extended in the case
of pre-96 pensioners/ family pensioners w.e.f. 1.9.1996. Accordingly it has been provided in
this Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998 regarding revision
of pension/ family pension of pre-1996 retirees that the consolidated family pension worked
out in accordance with provisions of this Memorandum shall be final in the case of only
those family pensioners who became entitled for family pension during the period from
1.9.1988 to 31.8.1996 and were sanctioned family pension at the rate of 30% of the last pay
drawn by the pensioner/deceased employee and that in case of other pensioners/ family
pensioners, consolidation of pension should be treated as an interim measure to provide
them immediate relief. Subsequently orders have been issued for revision of pension/ family
pension of pre-1988 pensioners/ family pensioners w.e.f. 1.9.1996 vide this Department
Memorandum No.F.15(5)FD(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998 wherein provision for sanction of
family pension @30% has already been made.

2. In continuation of instructions contained in this department Memorandum
No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD(Rules)/98 dated
11.6.98 the procedure for consolidation of family pension of Government servants who
retired/ died between 1.9.1988 to 31.8.1996 and whose last pay drawn exceeded Rs.1330/-
has further been simplified and now family pension may also be revised/ consolidated by the
Pension Payment Officer/ Treasury Officer in the following manner:-

1. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/98 dated 1.6.1998.
2. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 15.4.1999.

83
 (i) The existing family pension shall be consolidated w.e.f. 1.9.1996 in accordance with
the provisions contained in Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98
dated 21.3.1998.

(ii) Family pension shall be re-calculated at the rate of 30% of the last pay drawn by the
pensioner/ deceased employee and the difference between the family pension already
admissible under slab system and @30% of last pay drawn shall be worked out.

(iii) The additional family pension becoming due on account of the difference between
family pension already admissible under slab system and at the rate of 30% of last pay shall
be added to the consolidated family pension worked out as at (i) above. The total of these
two amounts i.e. the consolidated family pension plus additional family pension shall be
basic family pension w.e.f. 1.9.1996 which shall the payable w.e.f. 1.1.1997 and shall be
subject to the prescribed limits.

(iv) Dearness Relief on the basic family pension as at (iii) above shall be admissible in
accordance with the orders issued by the Government from time to time w.e.f. 1.1.1997.

3. Revision/ consolidation of enhanced family pension admissible for a specified period
as per extant rules to the eligible members of the family of a deceased Government
employee/pensioner shall be done as follows: -

(i) Revision of enhanced consolidated family pension will be necessary only in those
cases where the Government servant/ pensioner was in receipt of last pay exceeding
Rs.1330/- p.m. and who retired/ died on or after 1.9.1989 and in respect of whom family
pension at enhanced rate was admissible on or after 1.9.1996. In other cases where last
pay was upto Rs.1330/-, family pension at normal/ enhanced rate will be consolidated in
terms of provisions contained in Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98
dated 21.3.1998 and accordingly table appended thereto could be utilised for updating their
normal/ enhanced family pension.

(ii) In cases of family pensioners referred to at (i) above, family pension will be
consolidated/ revised both at enhanced rate as well as at normal rate separately, subject to
provisions of normal rules. The updated normal rate of family pension will become
applicable from the date family ceases to be eligible for enhanced rate. The floor ceiling of
Rs. 1275/- p.m. will also be applied separately for family pension admissible at normal as
well as enhanced rate. In no case enhanced family pension will be allowed at twice the
consolidated/revised normal rate of family pension.

(iii) In the case of existing pensioner at (i) above in whose case the family pension has
not come into operation as the pensioner was alive on 1.9.1996, the rate of family pension
at enhanced rate wherever applicable and at normal rate will also be updated and
consolidated in terms of this order. The updated rates of family pension will apply as and
when family pension becomes payable in such cases.

4. An example regarding calculation of basic family pension and enhanced family
pension admissible from 1.9.1996 is given at Annexure -I.

5. Arrears if already paid on account of consolidation of family pension as an interim
measure in accordance with the provisions contained in this Department Memorandum
No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998 and also dearness relief thereon, shall be adjusted
by pension disbursing authorities against arrears becoming due on the revision of family
pension and dearness relief admissible on the basis of this order.

6.(i) | Each pensioner/family pensioner, as the case may be, who is entitled to the benefit
of revision of family pension in terms of this order is required to apply for revision of family
pension in the prescribed form in triplicate as at Annexure II to his/her pension disbursing
authority. The pensioner/ family pensioner shall surrender his/her half of Pension Payment
Order to the pension disbursing authority i.e. the branch of the Bank/ Pension Payment
Officer/ Treasury Officer alongwith the application for revision of family pension.

84
 (ii) The Pension paying branch of the Bank will forward two copies of the application
alongwith both the halves of Pension Payment Order to the concerned Pension Payment
Officer/ Treasury Officer and one copy shall be retained by the Bank.

(iii) The Bank shall continue to make disbursement of pension/ family pension at the last
rate for a period of six months or receipt of the revised Pension Payment Order whichever is
earlier.

(iv) The respective Pension Payment Officer/ Treasury Officer shall calculate the revised
basic family pension and enhanced family pension by using the same format as given in the
example at Annexure-| and will keep this sheet with the file of pensioner maintained in his
office for checking/ audit in future.

(v) The respective Pension Payment Officer/ Treasury Officer shall indicate the revised
amount of family pension in the Pension Payment Order of the pensioner/ family pensioner
in the format given below :-

"Enhanced family pension @ ................- from 1.1.1997 or date of death whichever is
later and upto ..................- and thereafter @ .....................- as per conditions laid down in
original Pension Payment Order/ Family Pension Order."

(vi) The Pension Payment Officer/ Treasury Officer shall calculate the amount of arrear,
if any for the period from 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997, in cases where the age of family
pensioner was less than 70 years as on 1.1.1998. The procedure and conditions of payment
of this arrear amount shall be the same as is contained in Finance Department
Memorandum of even number dated 21.3.1998. The payment of arrear in cases where the
age of family pensioner as on 1.1.1998 was 70 years or above shall be made in cash.

te In cases where the family pensioner was alive on 1.9.1996 and died subsequently
his/her legal heir is/are also entitled for life time arrears w.e.f. 1.1.1997 till the death of family
pensioner. For this purpose legal heir/heirs may also apply to pension disbursing authority.

8. Orders have been issued by the Government from time to time in regard to
entitlement to family pension in case of those Government servants who seek permanent
absorption in Public Sector Undertakings or Autonomous Bodies etc. In cases where eligible
member of the family of the deceased absorbee were in receipt of/ entitled to family pension
as on 1.9.1996 in pursuance of the existing orders, their family pension will also be revised
in accordance with these orders.

9. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Order, no arrear shall be payable for the
period from 1.9.1996 to 31.12.1996 on account of revision of family pension.

10. The mode of payment of arrear and procedure for payment of arrear shall be as
contained in Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998.”

85
 (i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(४)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

ANNEXURE |

Example indicating calculation of basic family pension and
enhanced family pension w.e.f. 1.9.1996.

Date of retirement

Scale of pay

Last pay

Family pension admissible at the rate in force
Enhanced family pension (before 1.9.1996)

Consolidated Family Pension
(In terms of Memorandum dated 21.3.1998)

(a) Normal rate
(b) Enhanced rate

(a) Family pension admissible @ 30% of last
pay as at (iii) above

(b) Enhanced family pension

(a) Additional Family pension
(b) Enhanced additional family pension

(a) Basic family pension
(normal rate) on 1.9.1996

(b) Enhanced family pension on 1.9.1996

86

31.1.1990
3000-4500
3100/-
Rs.500/-
Rs.1000/-

(1. In cases of retirement -
double of normal family pension
or pension sanctioned to retired
Government servant, whichever
in less.

2. In case of death while in
service - double of normal family
pension or 50% of last pay,
whichever in less.)

Rs.1540/-
Rs.3030/-
Rs.930/-

Rs.1550/-

(50% of last pay or amount of
pension whichever is less except
in case of death while in service
it shall be 50% of last pay)

930-500 = 430
1550-1000 = 550
1540+430 = 1970

3030+550 = 3580
 ANNEXURE II

FORM OF APPLICATION

To,

The Pension Payment Officer/
Treasury Officer

Subject : - Revision of family pension.

Sir,

Kindly revise my family pension entitlement shown in my Pension Payment Order
(Pensioner's half enclosed) in terms of the Finance Department Memorandum
No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated the 15th April, 1999. The requisite particulars are given
below :-

1. Name of the applicant in block letters and
full postal address

2. Name of the deceased Government servant/
pensioner

3. Name of Wife/Husband

4. Date of retirement/ death of the Government employee
“5. Date from which family pension is being drawn.

6. Pension Payment Order (P.P.O.) No.

t. Office/Department in which the pensioner/

deceased Government servant (pensioner)
served last and the post held by him.

8. The scale of pay of the post last held and
the last pay drawn.

9. Name of the authority which issued PPO.

10. Name of the Pension Disbursing Authority

(with Saving Bank Accounts Number,
whichever applicable).

*Applicable only in cases where the applicant is a family pensioner.

DATE:

(SIGNATURE OF PENSIONER/FAMILY PENSIONER)

87
 63. Family Pension not admissible on award of extra ordinary pension

Where an award under the extra ordinary pension rules is admissible, no family
pension under these rules shall be authorised.

64. Regulation of family pension to the family of a re-employed military pensioner

A military pensioner, who on retirement from military service, on retiring pension,
service pension or invalid pension is governed for the grant of ordinary family pension by
Army Instruction 2/S/64 or corresponding Navy or Air Force instructions and is re-employed
in a civil service or civil post before attaining the age of superannuation, shall for the
purpose of eligibility for the family pension already authorised under the aforesaid
Army/Navy/Air Force instruction, be governed as follows:-

(i) if he dies while holding a civil post, his family shall be allowed family pension
under these rules or the family pension authorised at the time of retirement or
discharge from the Military service, whichever is more advantageous to the
family;

(ii) if he retires from the civil re-employment without earning any pension
therefor, his family shall be entitled to family pension as authorised at the
time of his retirement/discharge from military service;

(iii) if he retires from civil re-employment after becoming eligible for pension
therefor, he shall exercise an option at the time of applying for pension for
civil service either to be governed by family pension under these rules or to
avail of family pension benefits as authorised at the time of his
retirement/discharge from military service and the said option once exercised
shall be final, and irrevocable.

65. Family pension not to be granted to a person in receipt of or eligible for the
same from other sources

Family pension admissible under these rules shall not be granted to a person who is
already in receipt of Family Pension or is eligible therefor under any other rules of the
Central Government or a State Government and/or Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous
Body/Local Fund under the Central or/a State Government:

Provided that a person who is otherwise eligible for family pension under these rules
may opt to receive family pension under these rules if he forgoes family pension admissible
from any other source.

66. Definitions

(1) ‘Family’ for the purpose of these rules will include the following relations of the
Government servant:-

(a) wife, in the case of a male Government servant and husband, in the case of a
female Government servant;

(b) a judicially separated wife or husband, such separation not being granted on
the ground of adultery;

88
 ™(c) 501 / daughter including widows/divorced daughter till he/she attained the
age of 25 years or on earning a monthly income exceeding Rs.2550/- or upto
the date of his/her marriage/re-marriage, whichever is earlier. The term son/
daughter shall also include son/daughter adopted legally and posthumous
child of a Government servant.

(d) parents who were wholly dependant upon the Government servant when he/
she was alive provided the deceased employee had left behind neither a
widow nor a child and the income of parent is not more than Rs.2550/- per
month."

(2) ‘Emoluments’ means emoluments as defined in Rule 45 of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, which the deceased Government servant was drawing on
the date of his death while in service or immediately before his retirement; if on the date of
his death while in service or immediately before his retirement such Government servant
has been absent from duty on leave (including extraordinary leave) or suspension,
emoluments means the emoluments which he drew immediately before proceeding on such
leave or suspension.

67. Condition of grant

The family pension shall be admissible to -
(a) a widow/widower, up to the date of death or remarriage, whichever is earlier;

2"(b) unmarried son till he attains the age of twenty five years or on earning a
monthly income exceeding Rs.2550/-.

(c) daughter including widowed/divorced daughter till she attains the age of 25
years or on earning a monthly income exceeding Rs.2550/- per month or upto
the date of her marriage/re-marriage, whichever is earlier.

(d) parents who were wholly dependent upon the Government servant when
he/she was alive provided the deceased employee had left behind neither a
widow nor a child and the income of parent is not more than Rs.2550/-."

Provided that if the son or daughter of a Government servant is suffering from any
disorder or disability of mind or is physically crippled or disabled so as to render him or her
unable to earn a living even after attaining the age of twenty five years, the family pension
shall be payable to such son or daughter for life, subject to the following conditions,
namely, -

1. The existing clause (c) and (d) substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 8.8.2000. These rules shall be deemed to
have come into force with immediate effect. It shall also be applicable to the cases pertaining to the period before issue of this notification
but with immediate effect. The past cases decided otherwise need not be re-opened but hence forth they will be regulated in accordance
with the provisions amended by this notification.

8९००) son/daughter including widowed/divorced daughter till he/she attained the age of 25 years or upto the date of his/her marriage/re-
marriage, whichever is earlier."

(d) parents who were wholly dependant upon the Government servant when he/she was alive provided the deceased employee had left

behind neither a widow nor a child."

@__s The existing clause (c) substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.
"(c) son and unmarried daughter who has not attained the age of twenty five years including such son and daughter adopted legally. It will
also include posthumous child of a Government servant."

% Inserted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.

2. The existing clause (0), (c) and (d) substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 8.8.2000. These rules shall be deemed
to have come into force with immediate effect. It shall also be applicable to the cases pertaining to the period before issue of this notification
but with immediate effect. The past cases decided otherwise need not be re-opened but hence forth they will be regulated in accordance
with the provisions amended by this notification.

5"b) unmarried son till he attains the age of twenty five years;

(c) daughter including widowed/divorced daughter till she attains the age of 25 years or upto the date of her marriage / re-marriage,
whichever is earlier:"

ud) parents who were wholly dependent upon the Government servant when he/she was alive provided the deceased employee has left

behind neither a widow nor a child."

$ The existing clause (b) and (c) substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f. 1.10. 1996.
"(b) son, until he attains the age of twenty five years;
(c) unmarried daughter, until she attains the age of twenty five years or marriage, whichever is earlier:"

# Inserted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.

uy

89
 (i) If there are more than one such children suffering from disorder or disability
of mind or who are physically crippled or disabled, the family pension shall be
paid in the order of their birth and the younger of them will get the family
pension only after the elder next above him/her ceases to be eligible;

(ii) before allowing the family pension for life to any such son or daughter, the
sanctioning authority shall satisfy that the handicap is of such a nature so as
to prevent him or her from earning livelihood evidenced by a certificate
obtained from a medical officer not below the rank of Chief Medical & Health
Officer/Medical Jurist setting out, as far as possible, the exact mental or
physical incapacity; and

(iii) the person receiving the family pension as natural/legal guardian of such son
or daughter or such son or daughter not receiving the family pension through
the guardian, shall produce every three years a certificate from a medical
officer not below the rank of Chief Medical & Health Officer/Medical Jurist to
the effect that he or she continues to suffer from disorder or disability of mind
or continues to be physically crippled or disabled.

EXPLANATIONS :

(1) A son/daughter shall become ineligible for family pension from the date he/she
gets married or on earning a monthly income exceeding Rs.2550/- per month. He/she will be
required to produce six monthly a certificate regarding marital status and an annual
certificate regarding monthly income."

(2) In such a case, it shall be the duty of the natural/legal guardian or daughter, to
furnish a certificate to the Treasury or Bank, as the case may be, every year that she has
not yet married.

(3) Family pension to an eligible Government servant/pensioner is payable in
addition to his/her pay or pension, in cases where both husband and wife are Government
servants.

68. Order of Allotment

(a) (i) | Where the family pension is payable to more widows than one, the family
pension shall be paid in equal shares.

(ii) On the death of a widow, her share of the family pension shall become
payable to her eligible child:

Provided that if the widow is not survived by any child, her share of the
family pension shall not lapse but shall be payable to the other widows in
equal shares, or if there is only one such other widow, in full, to her.

(b) Where the deceased Government servant or pensioner is survived by a widow
but has left behind eligible child or children from another wife who is not alive,
the eligible child or children shall be entitled to the share of family pension
which the mother would have received if she had been alive at the time of the
death of the Government servant or pensioner.

1. The existing explanation (1) again substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 8.8.2000. These rules shall be deemed to
have come into force with immediate effect. It shall also be applicable to the cases pertaining to the period before issue of this notification
but with immediate effect. The past cases decided otherwise need not be re-opened but hence forth they will be regulated in accordance
with the provisions amended by this notification.
ey 1) A son/daughter shall become ineligible for family pension from the date he/she gets married."

The existing explanation (1) substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.
"(1) A daughter shall become ineligible for family pension from the date she gets married."

90
 Provided that on the share or shares of family pension payable to such a child
or children or to a widow or widows ceasing to be payable, such share or
shares shall not lapse, but shall be payable to the other widow or widows
and/or to other child or children otherwise eligible, in equal shares or if there is
only one widow or child, in full, to such widow or child.

(c) Where the deceased Government servant or pensioner is survived by a widow
but has left behind eligible child or children from a divorced wife or wives the
eligible child or children shall be entitled to the share of family pension which
the mother would have received at the time of the death of the Government
servant or pensioner had she not been so divorced.

Provided that on the share or shares of family pension payable to such a child
or children or to a widow or widows ceasing to be payable, such share or
shares shall not lapse, but shall be payable to the other widow or widows
and/or to other child or children otherwise eligible, in equal shares or if there is
only one widow or child, in full, to such widow or child.

(d) Where the family pension is payable to twin children it shall be paid to such
children in equal shares:

Provided that when one such child ceases to be eligible his/her share shall
revert to the other child and when both of them ceases to be eligible the family
pension shall be payable to the next eligible single child/twin children.

me

कर

Where the family pension is payable to parent it shall be paid first to the mother
and after her death it shall be payable to the father.”

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

Second wife not entitled to the family pension as a legally wedded wife under the
Hindu Marriage Act.

It is clarified that the second wife will not be entitled to family pension as legally
wedded wife. The issue was examined by the Govt. of India and similar decision has been
incorporated in C.C.S. (Pension) Rule 1972 and an extract of the opinion of Law Ministry
recorded therein is reproduced below: -

EXTRACT

It is specifically a question arising under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Under Rule
54(7) of the C.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1972, in case a deceased Government servant leaves
behind more than one widow or a widow and eligible offspring from another widow, they are
entitled to family pension in respect of that deceased Government servant. Section 11 of the
Act provides that any marriage solemnized after the commencement of the Act shall be null
and void and can be annulled against the other party by a decree of nullity if the same
contravenes any of the conditions specified in clause (i), (iv) and (v) of Section 5 of the Act.
Section 5 (1) stipulates that the marriage cannot be legally solemnized when either party
has a spouse living at the time of such marriage. Therefore, any second marriage by a
Hindu male after the commencement of 1955 Act during the lifetime of his first wife will be a
nullity and have no legal effect. Such marriage cannot be valid on the ground of any custom.
In fact, a custom opposed to an expressed provision of law is of no legal effect. So under
these circumstances, the second wife will not be entitled to the family pension as a legally
wedded wife.”

1. Inserted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 8.8.2000. These rules shall be deemed to have come into force with immediate
effect. It shall also be applicable to the cases pertaining to the period before issue of this notification but with immediate effect. The past
cases decided otherwise need not be re-opened but hence forth they will be regulated in accordance with the provisions amended by this
notification.

91
 69. Family pension not payable to more than one member at the same time

(i) Except as provided in rule 68, the family pension shall not be payable to more
than one member of the family at the same time.

(ii) If a deceased Government servant or pensioner leaves behind a widow or
widower, the family pension shall become payable to the widow or widower, failing which to
the eligible child.

(iii) Family pension to the children shall be payable in the order of their birth and the
younger of them will not be eligible for family pension unless the elder next above him/her
has become ineligible for the grant of family pension:

70. Family pension to be given to the eldest eligible child

Where a deceased Government servant or pensioner leaves behind more children
than one, the eldest eligible child shall be entitled to the family pension for the period
mentioned in clause (b) or clause (c) of rule 67, as the case may be, and after the expiry of
that period the next child shall become eligible for the grant of family pension.

71. Payment of family pension to the guardian on behalf of minor

Where family pension is granted under this rule to a minor, it shall be payable to the
guardian on behalf of the minor.

"72. Regulation of pension in case both wife and husband are Government
servants

In case both wife and husband are Government servants and are governed by the
provisions of these rules and one of them dies while in service or after retirement, the family
pension in respect of the deceased shall become payable to the surviving husband or wife
and in the event of the death of the husband or wife, the surviving child or children shall be
granted the two family pensions in respect of the deceased parents, subject to the limits
specified below, namely: -

(a) (i) if the surviving child or children is or are eligible to draw two family pensions at
the rate mentioned in rule 62(ii) the amount of both the pensions shall be limited
to twelve thousand four hundred and twenty five rupees per mensem;

(ii) if one of the family pensions ceases to be payable at the rate mentioned in rule
62(ii) and in lieu thereof the pension at the rate mentioned in rule 62(i) becomes
payable, the amount of both the pensions shall also be limited to twelve
thousand four hundred and twenty five rupees per mensem;

(b) if both the family pensions are payable at the rates mentioned in rule 62(i) the
amount of two pensions shall be limited to seven thousand four hundred and fifty
five rupees per mensem."

1. The existing Rule 72 substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(8)FD(Rules)/97 dated 10.10.2005 w.e.f. 1.10.1996. In accordance with the
aforesaid provisions the family pension shall be determined on notional basis during the period from 1.9.1996 to 31.12.1996 and no arrear
of family pension shall be payable and actual payment shall be made w.e.f. 1.1.1997. During the period from 1.9.1996 to 30.9.1996, the
corresponding provisions of family pension as contained in Rajasthan Service Rules shall also stand modified.

“72. Regulation of pension in case both wife and husband are Government Servants

In case both wife and husband are Government servants and are governed by the provisions of these rules and one of
them dies while in service or after retirement, the family pension in respect of the deceased shall become payable to the surviving
husband or wife and in the event of the death of the husband or wife, the surviving child or children shall be granted the two family
pensions in respect of the deceased parents, subject to the limits specified below, namely :-

(a) (i) if the surviving child or children is or are eligible to draw two family pensions at the rate mentioned in rule 62 (ii)
the amount of both the pensions shall be limited to two thousand five hundred rupees per mensem;

(ii) if one of the family pensions ceases to be payable at the rate mentioned in rule 62 (ii) and in lieu thereof the
pension at the rate mentioned in rule 62 (i) becomes payable, the amount of both the pensions shall also be
limited to two thousand five hundred rupees per mensem;

(b) if both the family pensions are payable at the rates mentioned in rule 62 (i) the amount of two pensions shall be
limited to one thousand two hundred and fifty rupees per mensem.”

92
 73. Suspension of family pension if the recipient is charged with the offence of
murdering the Government servant, etc.

(a) If a person, who in the event of death of a Government servant while in
service, is eligible to receive family pension under this rule, is charged with the offence of
murdering the Government servant or for abetting in the commission of such an offense, the
claim of such a person, including other eligible member or members of the family to receive
the family pension, shall remain suspended till the conclusion of the criminal proceedings
instituted against him.

(b) If on the conclusion of the criminal proceedings referred to in clause (a), the
person concerned -

(i) is convicted for the murder or abetting in the murder of the Government
servant, such a person shall be debarred from receiving the family pension
which shall be payable to other eligible member of the family, from the date of
death of the Government servant,

(ii) is acquitted of the charge of murder or abetting in the murder of the
Government servant, the family pension shall be payable to such a person
from the date of death of the Government servant.

(c) The provisions of clause (a) and clause (b) shall also apply to the family
pension becoming payable on the death of a Government servant after his retirement.

74. Communication of Details of family by the Govt. servant

(a) (i) As soon as a Government servant enters Government service, he
shall give details of his family in Form 3 to the Head of Office.

(ii) If the Government servant has no family, he shall furnish the details in
Form 3 as soon as he acquires a family.

(b) The Government servant shall communicate to the Head of Office any
subsequent change in the size of his family, including the fact of marriage of his female
child.

(c) | As and when the disability referred to in proviso to Rule 67 manifests itself in
a child which makes him/her unable to earn his/her living, the fact should be brought to the
notice of the Head of Office duly supported by a Medical Certificate from a Medical Officer,
not below the rank of a Civil Surgeon. This may be indicated in Form 3 by the Head of
Office. As and when the claim for family pension arises, the legal guardian of the child
should make an application supported by a fresh medical certificate from a Medical Officer,
not below the rank of Civil Surgeon, that the child still suffers from the disability.

(d) (i) The Head of Office shall, on receipt of the said Form 3, countersign
the same and get it pasted on the service book of the Government
servant concerned and acknowledge receipt of the said Form 3 and
all further communications received from the Government servant in
this behalf.

(ii) The Head of Office on receipt of communication from the Government
servant regarding any change in the size of family shall have such a
change incorporated in Form 3.

75. Ex-gratia grant to the family of a Government servant who dies while on duty
in certain circumstances

(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter except as otherwise provided, an
‘ex-gratia grant’ shall be admissible under sub rule (2) to the family of a Government servant
who dies while on duty in one of the following circumstances :

93
 (a) outside his normal headquarter,
(b) in an accident,

(c) due to injury intentionally inflicted or caused in consequence of the due
performance of his official duties,

(d) due to injury intentionally inflicted or caused in consequence of his official
position, and

(e) by violence attributable to causes relative to his service,

(f) while on duty, at own headquarter or outside headquarter, in connection with

special assignments like “Election duty’, “Census work” and/or such other as-
signments which do not fall within normal duties of the post held.

™2) (a) The amount of ex-gratia grant, when the Government servant dies
under the circumstance mentioned in clause (a) of sub rule (1) shall
be as follows: -

Emoluments of Government Amount of ex-gratia grant

servant
_(i) UptoRs.4500/-—————SRS«12,500/-
(ii) Above Rs.4500/- but below Rs.20,000/-
Rs. 9000/-
(iii) Rs. 9000/- and above Rs.25,000/-

(b) The amount of ex-gratia grant, when the Government servant dies
under any of the circumstances mentioned in clause (b) to (f) of sub
rule (1) shall be as follows: -

Emoluments of Government Amount of ex-gratia grant

servant
(i) | Upto Rs.4500/- Rs.60,000/-
(ii) Above Rs.4500/- but below Rs.90,000/-
Rs. 9000/-
(iii) Rs. 9000/- and above Rs.1,25,000/-

Provided that the amount of ex-gratia grant when the Government servant
dies while on duty, at own headquarter or outside headquarter in connection
with Election duty would be Rs.1,25,000/- irrespective of the emoluments of
the Government servant."

The existing sub-rule (2) substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)/98 dated 3.6.1998 w.e-f. 1.1.1997.
"(2) (a) The amount of ex-gratia grant, when the Government servant dies under the circumstance mentioned in clause (a) of sub rule (1)

shall be as follows :-

Emoluments of Government servant Amount of ex-gratia grant

i) upto Rs. 1680 Rs. 10,000

ii) above Rs.1680 but below Rs. 15,000
Rs.3050

iii) | Rs. 3050 and above Rs. 20,000

The amount of ex-gratia grant, when the Government servant dies under any of the circumstances mentioned in clause (b) to (f) of
sub rule (1) shall be as follows :-

Emoluments of Government servant Amount of ex-gratia grant

i) upto Rs.1680 Rs. 50,000

ii) above Rs.1680 but below Rs. 75,000
Rs.3050

iii) | Rs. 3050 and above; Rs. 1,00,000

Provided that the amount of ex-gratia grant when the Government servant dies while on duty, at own headquarter or outside headquarter in
connection with Election duty would be Rs. 1,00,000 irrespective of the emoluments of the Government servant."

94
 (3) The amount of ex-gratia grant under sub rule (2) shall be granted by the
Head of Department to the member of the family who has been granted family pension
under these rules after satisfying the following conditions :

(i) It is clearly established on record and certified in the sanction that the death
of the Government servant has taken place while on duty and this fact is not
subject to any dispute.

(ii) In the case of death in accident while on duty, the death has either taken
place on the spot of the accident or during the course of treatment of injuries
caused in such an accident prior to being declared fit by the authorised
medical attendant for resumption of duty.

Note: Accident means sudden and unavoidable mishap or a mishap due to an act
of devotion to duty.

(iii) In the case of death of a Government servant on duty by violence attributable
to service, means death as a result of encounter with criminals or in the
course of confrontation with mob or crowds of an unlawful assembly during
agitation, riot or civil commotion or communal disturbances etc.

(iv) The death of a Government servant in other than the circumstances
mentioned in sub rule (1) shall not be treated as death on duty for this
purpose.

(4) An application for ex-gratia grant under this rule shall be made by the
member of his/her family who is entitled for grant of family pension in Form 17 within a
period of one year from the date of death failing which the same shall not be entertained by
the Head of the Department.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (3) and subject to the
provisions of sub-rule (4), in the case of death of a Government servant, while on "election
duty", the Collector of the District shall also be competent to grant ex-gratia."

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. The provisions of this rule relating to special assignment of “Election duty”
shall also be applicable to the employees of the Central Government, Undertakings of
Centre or State, Statutory Corporations, Local Bodies, Autonomous Bodies, Cooperative
Societies, R.B.I., Nationalised Banks etc. and Home Guard personnel who die while on
election duty, at own headquarter or outside headquarter and would be granted an ex-gratia
of ?"Rs.1,25,000". The amount of ex-gratia grant shall be granted by the Collector of the
concerned district to the member of the family of the deceased who is entitled to receive the
Death Gratuity as per relevant rules, on receipt of application in the prescribed form 17.

2. Family of a Volunteer Home Guard who dies while on duty in the
circumstances mentioned in clauses (0) to (6) of sub rule (1) shall be granted ex-grtia of
2"Rs.60,000" only subject to fulfillment of the conditions mentioned in sub rule (3). The
amount of ex-gratia shall be granted by the Director General, Home Guard & Civil Defence
to the widow/minor children of the deceased on receipt of application in the prescribed form.

3"3. A Non-Government person, part time employee or contractual employee who
is requisitioned for Election Duty by the District Election Officer or his authorised officer and
who dies while on election duty, his family shall be granted an ex-gratia of Rs 60,000/- only
subject to fulfillment of the conditions mentioned in Sub-Rule (3) of Rule 75. The amount of
ex-gratia shall be granted by the District Election Officer to the widow/ minor children of the
deceased on receipt of application in the prescribed form."

1. Inserted vide FD Notification No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)/98 dated 19.05.2007.

2. The existing words & figures "Rs.1,00,000" and "Rs.50,000" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)/98
dated 3.6.1998 w.e.f. 1.1.1997.

३... Inserted vide FD Order No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)/98 dated 14.6.2006.

95
 76. Ex-gratia grant to the family of a Police/Civil Defence & Home Guard personnel
who die due to injury intentionally inflicted while on duty by a terrorist

(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, except as otherwise provided, an ‘ex-
gratia grant’ of ™Rs_1,25,000" shall be admissible to the family of Police/Civil Defence &
Home Guard personnel of any rank who dies due to injury intentionally inflicted while on
duty by a ‘terrorist’. The expression ‘terrorist’ shall have meaning as defined in Section
2(1)(h) of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987. The ex-gratia grant
shall be admissible in addition to other death-cum-retirement benefits available under these
rules. However, in a case where ex-gratia is granted under this rule, no ex-gratia shall be
admissible under Rule 75.

(2) For the purpose of this rule, injury intentionally inflicted in consequence of official
position of the Police/Civil Defence & Home Guard personnel shall be treated as injury
intentionally inflicted while on duty.

(3) The amount of ex-gratia grant under sub rule (1) shall be granted by the
Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan, Home Department to the member of the family
who has been granted Family Pension under these rules, after satisfying the following
conditions :-

(i) It is clearly established on record and certified in the sanction that the death
of this Police/Civil Defence & Home Guard Personnel has taken place due to
injury intentionally inflicted while on duty and this fact is not subject to any
dispute.

(ii) No ex-gratia has been granted under Rule 75.

(4) An application for ex-gratia grant shall be made by the member of his/her family
who is entitled for grant of family pension in the prescribed form 17 within a period of one
year from the date of death to the Director General of Police/the Director, Civil Defence &
Commandant General, Home Guard, as the case may be, failing which the same shall not
be entertained.

(5) The provisions of this rule shall also be applicable subject to the conditions laid
therein to Forestry Personnel, who dies while on duty in attack by the poachers, and shall be
sanctioned by the Secretary to Government, Forest Department, on application made to the
Principal Chief Conservator of Forest.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’ DECISION

The provisions of this rule shall also be applicable to a Volunteer of Civil Defence &
Home Guard subject to the conditions laid down in Rule 76, who dies due to injury
intentionally inflicted while on duty by a terrorist and the family of such a volunteer shall be
granted ex-gratia. The amount of ex-gratia grant shall be drawn by the Director, Civil
Defence and Commandant General Home Guards.

D - DEARNESS RELIEF ON PENSION/FAMILY PENSION

77. Dearness Relief on Pension/Family Pension

(i) Relief against price rise may be granted to the pensioners and family pensioners
in the form of Dearness Relief at such rates and subject to such conditions as the
Government may specify from time to time.

(See Appendix III)

1. The existing words & figures "Rs.1,00,000" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)/98 dated 3.6.1998 w.e.f.
1.1.1997.

96
 (ii) The payment of Dearness Relief will remain suspended when the pensioner
(including family pensioner) is employed/ re-employed in a Central/State Government
Department or employed/re-employed/permanently absorbed in a Central or a State
Government Company, Corporation, Undertaking or autonomous body/statutory body, local
body, cooperative society, institution etc. if it is wholly or substantially owned or controlled by
the Central/State Government or in which the Government has substantial financial interest
or receiving Grant-in-Aid from the Government to meet its administrative expenditure or in
Reserve Bank of India or in a Public Sector Bank or in GIC/LIC etc.

(iii) Dearness Relief on family pension shall remain suspended during the period of
re-employment or employment of the pensioner, either before grant of pension or after grant
of pension.

(iv) The State Government employees who get permanently absorbed in terms of
rule 33 and opt for lump sum payment in lieu of pro rata monthly pension in terms of rule 34,
shall not be eligible for dearness relief.

(v) In the case of pensioners who are in receipt of more than one pension, (including
family pension) the Dearness Relief will be calculated on the total of all pensions taken
together.

Operative portion of judgement prounced on 8.12.94 in Civil Appeal No.3542-46/90
by Supreme Court of India in Union of India & Others versus G.Vasudavan Pillai & Others is
reproduced below :-

"Denial of Dearness Relief on pension/family pension in cases of those ex-
servicemen who got re-employment or whose dependents got employment is legal and just.
The decision to reduce enhanced pension from pay of those ex-servicemen who were
holding civil post on 1.1.1986 following their re-employment is unconstitutional."

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’ DECISION

m4, In accordance with the provisions of Rule 77 and GRD No.1 appearing below
Rule 164 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 and _ order
No.F.1(36)FD(Gr.2)/87 dated 10.8.1998 inforce prior to the date of introduction of
aforesaid rules, the payment of Dearness Relief on pension/family pension remains
suspended during the period of re-employment/employment and hence it is not
payable.

It has been brought to the notice of the Government that some of the military
pensioners are drawing Dearness Relief on pension during the period of re-
employment / employment in contravention of the provisions of the aforesaid rules.

Accordingly all appointing authorities/drawing and disbursing officers are
directed to ask the re-employed military pensioner to furnish a certificate of non-
drawal of Dearness Relief on pension from the pension payment authorities of
military/pension paying branch of the respective Banks. In case some of the military
pensioner have actually drawn Dearness Relief on pension, they may be asked to
refund the over payment drawn and to furnish a certificate of non-drawal of Dearness
Relief on pension since appointment in the Government service.

All Drawing and Disbursing Officers shall be required to record a certificate in
the salary bill of re-employed military personnel that the certificate of non drawal of
Dearness Relief on pension have been obtained from the Pension Payment
Officer/Paying Branch of the Bank. This certificate shall invariably be recorded by
them in the salary bill for the month of January and June every year. It will be the
duty of the respective Treasury Officer to ensure that the requisite certificate has
been recorded by the concerned Drawing and Disbursing Officer in the salary bill
before they are passed for payment."

1. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/98 dated 28.12.1998.

97
 tug

TTA.

It has been decided by the Government that w.e.f. 01.07.2004, DA equal to
50% of the existing basic pay shall be merged with the basic pay and shown
distinctly as Dearness Pay, which will be counted for HRA, CCA, retirement benefits.
However, TA/ DA on tour/ transfer and Government accommodation shall continue to
be governed on the basis of basic pay alone. Compulsory deductions for GPF and
State Insurance shall also be made on the basic pay alone.

DA on Dearness Pay will be paid only in respect of DA instalments that
become due on 01.07.2004 and afterwards. The existing amount of DA over and
above 50% i.e. 11% will be calculated only on the basis of basic pay and shall not be
calculated on the basis of Basic Pay + Dearness Pay. Further increases in DA
(beyond 61%) will be calculated on the basis of Basic Pay + Dearness Pay. For
example, if 63% DA is payable from 01.07.2004, 50% will be converted to dearness
way, 11% will be calculated on the basis of Basic Pay alone and 2% will be
calculated on the basis of Basic Pay + Dearness Pay. Similarly, if 65% DA is payable
on 01.01.2005, 50% will be converted to dearness pay, 11% will be calculated on the
basis of Basic Pay alone and 4% will be calculated on the basis of Basic Pay +
Dearness Pay. And so on.

Similarly, in case of existing pensioners, 50% dearness relief will be
converted to dearness pension. The amount of existing dearness relief over and
above 50%, will be calculated only against basic pension and shall not be calculated
against basic pension + dearness pension. Any increase in the existing dearness
relief beyond 61% shall be calculated against basic pension + dearness pension, on
the lines indicated at para 2."

E- INTERIM RELIEF ON PENSION/FAMILY PENSION

Interim Relief on pension/family pension

Interim Relief on pension/family pension shall be admissible at the rate and subject

to the terms & conditions in Appendix XIl.

Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.6(3)FD(Rules)/2004 dated 24.05.2004.

98
 CHAPTER VI

DETERMINATION AND AUTHORISATION OF THE
AMOUNTS OF PENSION AND GRATUITY

A - PENSION AND GRATUITY

78. Preparation of list of Government servants due for retirement

(1) Every Head of Department shall have a list prepared every six months, that is, on
the 1st January, and the 1st July each year of all Government servants who are due to retire
within the next 24 to 30 months of that date.

(2) A copy of every such list shall be supplied to the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan, not later than 31st January or the 31st July, as the case may be, of that year.

(3) In the case of a Government servant retiring for reasons other than by way of
superannuation, the Head of Office shall promptly inform the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan, as soon as the fact of such retirement becomes known to him.

(4) A copy of the intimation sent by the Head of Office to the Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, under sub rule (3) shall also be endorsed to the Director Estates,
Jaipur and concerned Executive Engineer, Public Works Department if the Government
servant concerned is an allottee of Government accommodation.

NOTE

The pension work has since been taken over (November, 1979) by the State
Government from the Accountant General, Rajasthan, and is now being dealt with by the
Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

1. According to Rule 56A of Rajasthan Service Rules, a Government Servant is
compulsorily retired, on attaining the specified age, the day on which he attains that age is
reckoned as a non-working day under rule 7(1) of Rajasthan Service Rules. No specific
orders are necessary for retirement on due date under Government of Rajasthan’s Decision
below rule 30 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.

2. Administratively, it would, however, be advisable to issue retirement orders one
year in advance of the date of retirement, which will enable the department to process the
pension case expeditiously. A copy of such an order shall be endorsed to the Director,
Pension Department, Rajasthan, as also attached with the Pension case. While issuing such
an order, the appointing authority should indicate whether any Departmental Enquiry under
Rule 16 of R.C.S. (C.C.A.) Rules is pending against the Government servant concerned.
The retirement order shall be issued in Form No.6. Separate order shall be issued in respect
of every retiring employee.

3. If any departmental proceedings are initiated against the Government servant after
issue of the retirement order, the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, should be
informed promptly.

4. As per Government of Rajasthan’s Decision No.7 below rule 7, minor penalty
proceedings have no effect on pension.

99
 79. Intimation to the Directorate of Estates/Public Works Department regarding
issue of “No Demand Certificate”

(1) The Head of Office shall alongwith applications from the individuals concerned,
on prescribed Form 27, write to the Director of Estates, Jaipur, at least two years before the
anticipated date of retirement of the Government servant who is in occupation of a
Government accommodation, (hereinafter referred to as allottee) for the issue of a “No
Demand Certificate” in respect of the period preceding eight months of the retirement of the
allottee with a copy to the Executive Engineer of the concerned Division.

(2) On receipt of the intimation under sub rule (1), the Director Estates/Executive
Engineer, Public Works Department, shall take further action as provided in Rule 93.

(3) Government servants due for retirement and included in the list prepared under
Rule 78, who are not in occupation of any Government accommodation or have not taken
any furniture article from PWD stores on rent, shall declare accordingly in Form 27A.

(4) Copy of Form 27 or Form 27A, as the case may be, will be attached with Form 7 -
form for assessing pension and gratuity.

80. Preparation of Pension papers

Every Head of Office shall undertake the work of preparation of pension papers in
Form 7 two years before the date on which a Government servant is due to retire on
superannuation, or on the date on which he proceeds on leave preparatory to retirement
whichever is earlier.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

'™ राजस्थान सिविल सेवा (पेंशन) नियम, 1996 के प्रावधानों के अन्तर्गत पेंशन स्वीकृति संबंधित
प्रशासनिक विभाग»विभागाध्यक्ष»कार्यालयाध्यक्ष द्वारा संबंधित कर्मचारी/अधिकारी का समस्त सेवा रेकार्ड
इत्यादि की जांच कर जारी करनी होती है। इसी आधार पर पेंशन विभाग द्वारा पेंशन परिलाभों की अधिकृतियां
जारी की जाती हैं| कर्मचारी के सेवाकाल का सम्पूर्ण रेकार्ड संबंधित कार्यालय में ही उपलब्ध होने के कारण
न्यायिक प्रकरणों में भी न्यायालय के निर्णय प्राप्त होने पर प्रकरणों की नियमों के परिपेक्ष्य में जांच की जाकर
अपील अथवा निर्णय की अनुपालना हेतु आवश्यक कार्यवाही संबंधित विभाग द्वारा ही की जानी होती है।

प्राय: देखा गया है कि संबंधित विभाग द्वारा पेंशन की देयता आदि का निर्धारण समय पर नहीं करते हैं
एवं सेवानिवृत्त कर्मचारियों को पेंशन परिलाभ सेवानिवृत्ति के पश्चात्‌ लम्बे समय तक अधिकृत नहीं हो पाते हैं |
इसी क्रम में यह उल्लेख करना भी समीचीन होगा कि पेंशन नियमों के अन्तर्गत पेंशन प्रकरणों के निस्तारण की
प्रक्रिया सेवानिवृत्ति से दो वर्ष पूर्व प्रारम्भ किये जाने का प्रावधान है, परन्तु विभागों द्वारा इन निर्देशों की पालना
नहीं की जाती है एवं समय पर कार्यवाही सम्पूर्ण नहीं होने के फलस्वरूप सेवानिवृत कर्मचारी,अधिकारी को
सेवानिवृत्ति दिनांक पर पेंशन लाभ की अधिकृतियां जारी नहीं हो पाती हैं | फलस्वरूप न्यायालय में वाद दायर
हो रहे हैं | न्यायालय के निर्णयों की जांच कर कार्यवाही उचित समय पर नहीं होने से संबंधित विभागों के साथ
पेंशन विभाग को भी न्यायिक प्रकरणों में एवं अवमानना प्रकरणों में पक्षकार बनाना पडता है |

1... Inserted vide FD Circular No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/2000 dated 17.7.2000

100
 अतः पेंशन प्रकरणों के निस्तारण हेतु निर्धारित की गई प्रक्रिया लागू किया जाना सुनिश्चित कराया

जावे ताकि ब्याज के भुगतान एवं अनावश्यक वादकरण से बचा जा सके | विलम्ब से निर्धारित पेंशन प्रकरणों की
समीक्षा कर दोषी कर्मचारियों,/अधिकारियों के खिलाफ अनुशासनात्मक कार्यवाही की जावे ताकि सेवानिवृत्त
कर्मियों के पेंशन परिलाभ समय पर अधिकृत करना सुनिश्चित किया जा सके |"

1०2 अनेक मामलों में कार्यालयाध्यक्ष/विभागाध्यक्ष/पेंशन विभाग/पेंशन वितरण अधिकारियों के स्तर
पर विलम्ब होने के कारण सेवानिवृत कर्मचारियों को सेवानिवृति लाभों का भुगतान सेवानिवृति के तुरन्त बाद

नहीं हो पाता है | राजस्थान सिविल सेवा (पेंशन) नियम, 1996 के अनुसार प्रत्येक पेंशन प्रकरण राज्य कर्मचारी
की अधिवार्षिकीय आयु पूर्ण करने की तिथि से दो वर्ष पूर्व प्रारम्भ कर सेवानिवृति के पूर्व ही पेंशन एवं उपादान
स्वीकृत करने के प्रावधान हैं।

माननीय राजस्थान उच्च न्यायालय, जयपुर पीठ, जयपुर द्वारा डी.बी. सिविल स्पेशल अपील (याचिका)
संख्या : 271/1999 - श्री सुरेन्द्र मोहन सक्सेना बनाम राजस्थान राज्य व अन्य में निर्देश दिये हैं कि सेवानिवृति
के ged बाद सेवानिवृति लाभों के भुगतान की व्यवस्था सुनिश्चित की जावे ताकि दण्डनीय ब्याज एवं
अनावश्यक वादकरण (Litigation) से बचा जा सके |

अतः सभी संबंधित अधिकारी यह सुनिश्चित करें कि प्रत्येक राज्य कर्मचारी की अधिवार्षिकीय आयु पर

सेवानिवृति से दो वर्ष पूर्व राजस्थान सिविल सेवा (पेंशन) नियम, 1996 के अनुसार कार्यालयाध्यक्ष,/विभागाध्यक्ष
स्तर पर कार्यवाही प्रारम्भ की जावे | अन्य मामलों में सेवानिवृति आदेश जारी होने/सेवा के दौरान मृत्यु होने की
सूचना मिलने पर अविलम्ब कार्यवाही प्रारम्भ की जावें, ताकि अधिवार्षिकीय आयु पर सेवानिवृति के मामलों में
सेवानिवृति के तुरन्त बाद व अन्य मामलों में 60 दिवस के भीतर नियमानुसार देय सेवानिवृति लाभ जैसे,

उपादान/प्रोविजनल उपदान/पेंशन रूपान्तरण राशि का भुगतान हो सके तथा मासिक पेंशन» प्रोविजनल
पेंशन/पारिवारिक पेंशन का भुगतान प्रारम्भ हो सके |”

81. Stages for the completion of pension papers

(1) The Head of Office shall divide the period of preparatory work of two years
referred to in Rule 80 in the following three stages :-

(a) First Stage - |. Verification of service:

(i) | The Head of Office shall go through the service book of the Government
servant and satisfy himself as to whether the certificates of verification
for the entire service are recorded therein.

(ii) In respect of the unverified portion or portions of service, he shall
arrange to verify the portion or portions of such service, as the case
may be, with reference to pay bills, acquittance rolls or other relevant
records and record necessary certificates in the service book.

(iii) If the service for any period is not capable of being verified in the
manner specified in sub clause (i) and sub clause (ii), that period of
service having been rendered by the Government servant in another
office or Department, a reference shall be made to the Head of Office in
which the Government servant is shown to have served during that
period for the purpose of verification.

1. Inserted vide FD Circular No.F.9(4)FD(Rules)/2000 dated 8.8.2000

101
 Note:-

(b)

(iv) In respect of that unverified portion of service for which entries
regulating the rate of pay, grant of annual increment, pay fixation,
details of periods of leave etc. are available, he shall verify the same on
the basis of the above details and record the same in the Service Book.

(v) In respect of work charged employees appointed to regular posts, he
shall check that the option for pension given by him and accepted by
the competent authority has been pasted in the Service Book and that
the entries exist in the service books for deposit of employer’s share of
Contributory Provident Fund into the Government Account.

(vi) If any portion of service rendered by a Government servant is not
capable of being verified in the manner specified in sub clause (i) or sub
clause (ii) or sub clause (iii), or sub clause(iv), the Government serv-
ant shall be asked to file a written statement in Form 9 on plain paper
stating that he had in fact rendered that period of service, and shall, at
the foot of the statement, make and subscribe to a declaration as to the
truth of that statement, and shall in support of such declaration produce
all documentary evidence and furnish all information which is in his
power to produce or furnish.

(vii) The Head of Office shall, after taking into consideration the facts in the
written statement and the evidence produced and the information fur-
nished by that Government servant in support of the said period of
service, admit that portion of service as having been rendered for the
purpose of calculating the pension of that Government servant, and
issue order in Form 9A and make an entry in the service book of the
Government servant.

In case of loss of service book, attention is invited to Rule 160 of Rajasthan
Service Rules and action be taken accordingly.

Il. Assessment of long term dues:

(viii) In respect of Government servants, who have taken long term advances
like House Building Advance, Conveyance Advance etc., he shall
correspond with the concerned Treasury Officer as indicated in the
procedure below rule 94. He will also refer to the entries of long term
advances made in the service book of the Government servants for
assessing the final dues. He will also ask the Government servant to
declare the details of long term advances taken by him.

Ill. Finalisation of pending fixation cases:

(ix) _ If fixation of pay in various Pay Scale Rules is outstanding, the Head of
Office will get them expeditiously finalised.

Second Stage - Making good omission in the service book and completion of
other formalities.

(i) | The Head of Office while scrutinizing the certificates of verification of
service, shall also identify if there are any other omissions, imper-
fections or deficiencies which have a direct bearing on the
determination of emoluments and the service qualifying for pension.

102
 (c)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

Every effort shall be made to complete the verification of service, as in
clause (a) and to make good omissions, imperfections or deficiencies
referred to in sub clause (i) of this clause. Any omissions, imperfections
or deficiencies including the portion of service shown as unverified in
the service book, which it has not been possible to verify in accordance
with the procedure laid down in clause (a) shall be ignored and service
qualifying for pension shall be determined on the basis of the entries in
the service book.

Determination of emoluments - For the purpose of calculation of
emoluments, the Head of Office shall verify from the service book the
correctness of the emoluments drawn or to be drawn by the
Government servant immediately before his retirement.

In case of officiating appointment, the Head of Office will record a
certificate in the Service Book that the appointment to the higher post
has not been made in the leave vacancy or to hold charge temporarily
in addition to the duties of his own post, as provided in Rule 45 (Note 3)
of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.

The Head Of Office will obtain a certificate in the Service Book from the
senior accounts personnel in the office that all the fixations of the
Government servant made from time to time are correct and that the
last pay on which pension case is to be prepared has been arrived at
correctly.

To ensure that any alteration in the date of birth recorded in the Service
Book bears the approval of the competent authority; and to ensure that
the date of birth has not been changed/altered in the Service Book after
31.12.1978;

If the Government servant was on foreign service or deputation,
whether pension contribution has been received from the borrowing
authority and entry to this effect has been made in the Service Book or
other records. The Head of Office shall identify omissions etc. and
rectify the same after reference to relevant records or offices. Provisions
contained in Government of Rajasthan’s Decision below Rule 88 of
RCS (Pension) Rules, 1996, shall also be taken into consideration for
this purpose.

Third Stage - Obtaining Form 5 by the Head of Office - Eight months prior to
the date of retirement of the Government servant, the Head of Office shall
obtain Form 5 from the Government servant.

(2) Action under clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub rule (1) shall be completed eight
months prior to the date of retirement of the Government servant.

82. Completion of pension papers

The Head of Office shall complete Part | of Form 7 not later than six months of the
date of retirement of the Government servant. He will also issue a tentative L.P.C. in Form
31 for attaching with Form 7.

103
 83. Forwarding of pension papers to Director, Pension Department

(1) After complying with the requirement of Rules 81 and 82, the Head of Office shall
forward to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Form 5 and Form 7 duly completed
with a covering letter in Form 8 alongwith service book of the Government servant duly
completed, upto-date, and any other document relied upon for the verification of service.

(2) The Head of Office shall retain a copy of each of the Forms referred to in sub rule
(1) for his records.

(3) Where the payment is desired in another circle of accounting unit, the Head of
Office shall send Form 7 in duplicate to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan.

(4) The papers referred to in sub rule (1) shall be forwarded to the Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, not later than six months before the date of retirement of
Government servant.

(5) A copy of the Privilege Leave account shall be retained in the office, duly
attested, for grant of encashment benefits, if applied for by the retiring government servant,
at the time of retirement.

84. Intimation to the Director, Pension Department, regarding any event having
bearing on pension

(1) If after the pension papers have been forwarded to the Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, within the period specified in sub rule (4) of Rule 83, any event
occurs which has a bearing on the amount of pension admissible, or on the data contained
in tentative Last Pay Certificate, the fact shall be promptly reported to the Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, by the Head of Office.

(2) If no intimation regarding any event from the date of forwarding pension papers to
the Director, Pension Department to the date of actual retirement, having a bearing on the
amount of pension, is received by the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, he may
presume that -

(i) the service in between the period from the date of forwarding of pension
papers to the actual date of retirement, has been rendered, verified and
accepted as qualifying service counting for pension;

(ii) the dues of the Government recoverable from the retiring Government
servant already intimated to him under rule 85 and/or shown in tentative
L.P.C. are final; and

(iii) no departmental enquiry has been initiated against the employee, after
forwarding of the pension papers to his Department.

Note:- The Head of Office while intimating Director Pension regarding any event
having a bearing on the amount of pension, in case Pension Payment Order/
Gratuity Payment Order has already been issued, shall ensure delivery of the
same to the concerned pension disbursing authority also.

(3) On receipt of any intimation by the Director, Pension Department, under rule
84(1), the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall -

(i) if the Pension Payment Order/Gratuity Payment Order has been issued, stop
the payment of the amount authorised and revise/amend the P.P.O./G.P.O.;

104
 (ii) if the Pension Payment Order/Gratuity Payment Order has not been issued,
he will revise the particulars accordingly and take further steps in the light of
the revised particulars.

85. Intimation of the particulars of Government dues to the Director Pension
Department, Rajasthan

(1) The Head of Office after ascertaining and assessing the Government dues as in
Rule 92, shall furnish the particulars thereof to the Director, Pension Department, at least
two months before the date of retirement of a Government servant so that the dues are
recovered out of the gratuity before its payment is authorised.

(2) If, after the particulars of Government dues have been intimated to the Director,
Pension Department under sub rule (1), any additional Government dues come to the notice
of the Head of Office, such dues shall be promptly reported to the Director, Pension
Department.

86. Provisional Pension

(1) The various stages of action laid down in Rule 81 shall be strictly followed by the
Head of Office. There may be an isolated case where, inspite of following the procedure laid
down in Rule 81, it may not be possible for the Head of Office to forward the pension papers
referred to in Rule 83 to the Director, Pension Department within the period prescribed in
sub rule (4) of that rule or where the pension papers have been forwarded to the Director,
Pension Department, within the prescribed period but the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan, may have returned the pension papers to the Head of Office for eliciting further
information before issue of pension payment order and order for the payment of gratuity. If
the Head of Office in such a case is of the opinion that the Government servant is likely to
retire before his pension and gratuity or both can be finally assessed and settled in
accordance with the provisions of these rules, he shall without delay, take steps to
determine the qualifying years of service and the emoluments qualifying for pension after
the most careful summary investigations that may be made. For this purpose, he shall -

(i) rely upon such information as may be available in the official records, and

(ii) ask the retiring Government servant to file a written statement on plain paper
stating the total length of qualifying service including details of emoluments
last drawn but excluding the breaks and other non qualifying periods of
service.

(2) The Government servant while furnishing the statement as in clause (ii) of sub
rule (1) shall, at the foot of the statement make and subscribe to a declaration as to the truth
of the statement.

(3) The Head of Office shall thereafter determine the qualifying years of service and
the emoluments qualifying for pension in accordance with the information available in the
official records and the information obtained from the retiring Government servant under sub
rule (1). He shall, then determine the amount of provisional pension and the amount of
provisional retirement gratuity.

(4) After the amount of pension and gratuity have been determined under sub rule
(3), the Head of Office shall take further action as follows :-

(a) He shall issue a sanction in form 33 addressed to the Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, authorising -

105
 (b)

(०)

(ii)

100% (percent) of pension as determined under sub rule (3) as
provisional pension which shall remain valid till the pension case is
finalised by the Director, Pension Department.

75 percent of the gratuity as provisional gratuity as determined under
sub rule (3) if no amount of House Building Advance has been set
apart for recovery out of Retirement/Death gratuity at the time of grant
of HBA, otherwise not exceeding 20 percent of the gratuity as
provisional gratuity.

He shall indicate in the sanction letter the amount recoverable from the
gratuity under sub rule (1) of Rule 85. Special care shall be taken for recovery
of the amount set apart for adjustment from the retirement gratuity.

On receipt of sanction of provisional pension from the Head of Office, the
Director, Pension Department shall issue provisional Pension Payment Order
and Gratuity Payment Order within a week positively.

(5) The amount of provisional pension and gratuity payable under sub rule (4) shall, if
necessary, be revised on the completion of the detailed scrutiny of the records.

(6)

(a)

(ii)

(b)

(०)

When the amount of final pension and the amount of final gratuity had
been determined by the Head of Office the Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, shall -

issue the Pension Payment Order,

issue the Gratuity Payment Order authorising disbursement of the
difference between the final amount of gratuity and the amount of
provisional gratuity paid under sub clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub rule
(4) after adjusting the Government dues, if any, which may have come
to notice after the payment of provisional gratuity.

If the amount of provisional pension disbursed to a Government
servant under sub rule (4) is, on its final assessment found to be in
excess of the final pension assessed by the Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, it shall be open to the Director, Pension
Department to adjust the excess amount of pension out of gratuity
withheld under sub clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub rule (4) or recover
the excess amount of pension in instalments by making short
payment of the pension payable in future.

If the amount of provisional gratuity granted and disbursed to a
Government servant is found to be in excess of final gratuity assessed
by the Director, Pension Department, he shall be called upon to
refund such excess in the manner and subject to the conditions
specified in rule 91.

87. Authorisation of Pension and Gratuity by Director, Pension Department

(1)

(a)

On receipt of pension papers referred to in Rule 83, the Director
Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall apply the requisite checks,
record the account enfacement in Part Il of Form 7 and assess the
amount of pension and gratuity and issue the pension payment order
not later than one month in advance of the date of the retirement of the
Government servant if the pension is payable in his circle of accounting
unit.

106
 (b) If the pension is payable in another circle of accounting unit, the
Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall send the pension
payment order alongwith a copy of Form 7 and the accounts enface-
ment to the Accounts Officer of that unit for arranging payment, through
the Accountant General, Rajasthan.

(2) The amount of gratuity as determined by the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan, shall be authorised by him by issue of a Gratuity Payment Order on the
Treasury/Pension Payment Office, after adjusting the Government dues, if any, referred to in
Rule 92."

(3) The Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall adjust the amount of
provisional pension and the amount of provisional gratuity, if any, paid.

(4) The amount of gratuity withheld under sub rule (5) of Rule 93, shall be adjusted
by the Director, Pension Department against the outstanding rent intimated by the
Directorate of Estates/Public Works Department and the balance, if any, refunded to the
retired Government servant.

(5) A copy of the Pension Payment Order and/or Gratuity Payment Order shall also
be endorsed to the concerned pensioner.

(6) The Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall inform the Head of Office
immediately about the issue of the -

(i) Pension Payment Order;
(ii) Gratuity Payment Order; and

(iii) Balance of the Gratuity Payment Order; and return the pension papers to him
which are no longer necessary.

(7) The Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall record briefly in the Part II of
Form 7 his reasons for disallowing any service claimed or any other disallowance.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

1. In the final Pension Payment Order and/or Gratuity Payment Order, the Director,
Pension Department shall not impose any conditions before drawal of amount like
production of No Dues Certificate, Certificate of no Departmental Enquiry under rule 16 of
CCA rules etc. except final LPC.

1०2 निदेशक पेंशन विभाग द्वारा राज्य सरकार के यह ध्यान में लाया गया है कि यदा war संबंधित
सेवानिवृत्त कर्मचारी द्वारा पेंशन प्रकरण के निस्तारण में सहयोग नहीं किया जाने से भी विलम्ब होता है |

1. The existing sub-rule (2) again substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 Pt. | dated 31.7.2001.

@(2) The amount of gratuity as determined by the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall be payable by him on
the date of retirement by issue of a Gratuity Payment Order on the Treasury/Pension Payment Office, after adjusting the
Government dues, if any, referred to in Rule 92."

@ _ The existing sub-rule (2) substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 23/27.3.1999.

"(2) The amount of gratuity as determined by the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall be authorised by him by
issue of a Gratuity Payment Order on the Treasury/Pension Payment Office, after adjusting the Government dues, if any,
referred to in Rule 92."

107
 पेंशन प्रकरण मूलतः: संबंधित विभाग/कार्यालय प्रधान द्वारा ही तैयार करना होता है | समस्त संबंधित
रेकार्ड/सूचना विभाग के पास उपलब्ध होती है | संबंधित कर्मचारी से तो केवल वर्णात्मक नामावली एवं परिवार
के सदस्यों की सूची अपेक्षित है| संबंधित कर्मचारी द्वारा पेंशन प्रकरण में सहयोग नहीं करने का कारण पेंशन
नियमों एवं प्रक्रिया की पूर्णतः जानकारी नहीं होना भी होता है |

पेंशन प्रकरण के निस्तारण में संबंधित कर्मचारी से जो कार्यवाही अपेक्षित है, उसका उल्लेख राज0
सिविल सेवा (पेंशन) नियमों की अनुसूची XI में किया गया है। अतः समस्त नियुक्ति अधिकारी सेवानिवृत्ति
आदेश के साथ ही उपरोक्त अनुसूची > की प्रति संबंधित कर्मचारी को पालना हेतु उपलब्ध Herd | अल्प वेतन
anf कर्मचारियों के पेंशन/पारिवारिक पेंशन प्रकरण तैयार करवाने हेतु संबंधित विभाग/कार्यालय के पेंशन
नियमों के विज्ञ लिपिक को जिम्मेवार बनाया जावे |

अतः प्रत्येक विभागाध्यक्ष/कार्यालयाध्यक्ष से यह अपेक्षा है कि उपरोक्त निर्देशों की पालना कर पेंशन
प्रकरणों को तत्परता से निबटाए |”

88. Government servant on foreign service

In the case of a Government servant who retires from service while on foreign
service, action to authorise pension and gratuity in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter shall be taken by the authority which sanctioned deputation to foreign service.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

Where it is the responsibility of the foreign employer/borrowing authority to make
payment of pension contribution in accordance with the provisions contained in the
Rajasthan Service Rules, it may be that either some of the contributions have not been
recovered or partially recovered or records in respect of recovery of such contributions are
incomplete. Since the responsibility for making pension contribution is that of borrowing
Government or Organisation, as the case may be, the authority concerned should pursue
the matter with the borrowing authority separately for appropriate action, but in no case the
processing and finalisation of the pension case should be withheld or delayed on this
account. In such cases, the entire period of service rendered under Central Government or
any other State Government or foreign employer or body should be counted as qualifying
service for pension.

1... Inserted vide FD Circular No. F.1(14)FD(Rules)/96 dated 27.12.2001.

108
 ™g9, Interest on delayed payment of retiral benefits :

2T(1) If the payment of retiral benefits has been authorised after 60 days from the
date when its payment became due, and it is established that the delay in payment was not
on account of failure on the part of the Government servant in compliance of the procedure
laid down in this chapter or elsewhere in these rules, interest @ 9% per annum from the
date retiral benefits become due would be payable till the end of the month preceeding the
month in which the retiral benefits are authorised.]”

(2) Every case of delayed payment of retiral benefits shall, suo moto, be examined
by the Head of Office and shall be forwarded to the Administrative Department through the
Head of the Department, and where the Administrative Department is satisfied that the delay
in the payment of retiral benefits was caused on account of administrative lapse or inaction,
the Administrative Department concerned shall issue sanction for the payment of interest to
the Director, Pension Department.

(3) In all cases, where payment of interest has been authorised, the Administrative
Department concerned shall fix responsibility and take disciplinary action under the
Rajasthan Civil Services (C.C.A.) Rules, 1958 against the Government servant(s) who is/are
found responsible for the delay in the payment of retiral benefits and shall recover the loss
caused to the Government due to payment of interest to the pensioner from the Government
servant(s) held responsible.

(4) In the order for payment of interest, the Administrative Department shall also
mention the name(s) of officer(s)/official(s) responsible for delay and the amount of interest
recoverable from him/them.

1. The existing rule 89 substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 Pt-Il dated 12.6.2001.

"89. Interest on delayed payment of gratuity

(1) If the payment of gratuity has been authorised after three months from the date when its payment became due, and it is clearly
established that the delay in payment was attributable to administrative lapse, interest at the rate of five percent per annum for the period beyond
three months after gratuity becomes due would be payable till the end of the month preceding the month in which the payment is actually made.

Provided that the delay in the payment was not caused on account of failure on the part of the Government servant to comply with the
procedure laid down in this Chapter or elsewhere in these Rules.

(2) Every case of delayed payment of gratuity shall, suo moto, be considered by the Head of Office and shall be forwarded to the
Administrative Department through the Head of the Department, and where the Administrative Department is satisfied that the delay in the
payment of gratuity was caused on account of administrative lapse or inaction, the Administrative Department shall make a recommendation to
the Finance Department, for the payment of interest.

(3) If the recommendation of the Administrative Department made under sub rule (2) is accepted by the Finance Department, the
Administrative Department concerned shall issue sanction for the payment of interest to the Director, Pension Department.

(4) In all case, where the payment of interest has been authorised, the Administrative Department concerned shall fix responsibility
and take disciplinary action against the Government servant or servants concerned who are found responsible for the delay in the payment of
gratuity.

(5) If as a result of Government's decision taken subsequent to the retirement of a Government servant, the amount of gratuity
already paid on his retirement is enhanced on account of -

(a) grant of emoluments higher than the emoluments on which gratuity, already paid, was determined, or
(b) liberalistion in the provisions of these rules from a date prior, to the date of retirement of the Government servant
concerned.

No interest on the arrears of gratuity shall be paid.
NOTES
(i) The payment of gratuity becomes due immediately on retirement and in case of death while in service from the date of application
for grant of Death Gratuity.

(ii) In case of Government servants against whom disciplinary/judicial proceedings are pending on the date of retirement, no gratuity
is paid until the conclusion of the proceedings and the issue of the final orders thereon. The gratuity if allowed to be drawn by the competent
authority on the conclusion of the proceedings will be deemed to have fallen due on the date of issue of orders by the competent authority."

2. The existing sub-rule (1) of Rule 89 substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 Pt-I dated 7.6.2004.

“(1) Except in exceptional circumstances, if the payment of retiral benefits has been authorised after 60 days from the date when its
payment became due, and it is clearly established that the delay in payment was not on account of failure on the part of the Government servant
to comply with the procedure laid down in this Chapter or elsewhere in these rules, interest @ 12% per annum for the period beyond 60 days
after retiral benefits become due would be payable till the end of the month preceding the month in which the retiral benefits are authorised.”

109
 (5) If as a result of Government’s decision taken subsequent to the retirement of a
Government servant, the amount of retiral benefits already paid on his retirement is
enhanced on account of -

(a) grant of emoluments higher than the emoluments on which retiral
benefits, already paid, were determined, or

(b) liberalisation in the provisions of these rules from a date prior, to the
date of retirement of the Government servant concerned.

No interest on the arrears of retiral benefits shall be paid.

(6) In case any delay is caused in the Pension Department, responsibility shall be
fixed for such delay and suitable action taken against such erring official(s) to recover the
interest paid to the pensioner.

NOTES

(i) The payment of retiral benefits becomes due on the date of retirement and in the
case of death while in service, from the date of application for payment of respective retiral
benefits.

(ii) In case of Government servants against whom disciplinary/judicial proceedings
are pending on the date of retirement, no retiral benefits be paid except provisional pension,
until the conclusion of the proceedings and the issue of the final orders thereon. The retiral
benefits, if allowed to be drawn by the competent authority on the conclusion of the
proceedings, will be deemed to have fallen due on the date of issue of orders by the
competent authority."

™GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN'S DECISION

In the judgement pronounced by the Hon'ble Rajasthan High Court on 12.9.1997 in
D.B. Civil Special Appeal (Writ) No.297/1995 and others, it has been ordered that in the
eventuality of a delay in the payment of retial benefits, without sufficient reason, the retiring
employees shall be entitled to receive interest thereon @ 12% per annum, for the period
commencing from 60 days after the date of such retiral benefits becoming due, upto the
date of authorisation of such benefits to the employee by the Director, Pension Department.
It has been ordered further that such interest shall be recoverable personally from the
concerned Head of Department/other officer held responsible for the delay.

The Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 has already provided for the
procedure and the calendar for sanction and authorisation of pension and gratuity to retired
employees. Rule 80 of the said rules very clearly provides that every Head of Office shall
undertake the work of preparation of pension papers in Form 7 two years before the date on
which a Government servant is due to retire on superannuation, or on the date on which he
proceeds on leave preparatory to retirement whichever is earlier. The rules further spell out
the various stages for completion of the pension papers. These rules also provide that the
Head of Office shall forward to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan Form 5 and 7
duly completed with a covering letter in Form 8 alongwith Service Book of the Government
servant duly completed, upto date, and any other document relied upon for the verification of
the service. This must be done by the Head of Office not later than 6 months before the date
of retirement of the Government servant. Once this is done in time, it will become duty of the
Director, Pension Department to ensure that all formalities are completed and necessary
orders issued before the date of superannuation of the employee.

1. Inserted vide FD Circular No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 24.2.2001.

110
 The matter has been considered by the Government in the light of the orders of the
Hon'ble High Court mentioned above and, in addition to the procedure already laid down
under the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, the following guidelines are
further issued for strict compliance : -

1.

(a)

Because of the reason that the retirement date is already determined, the
Department concerned should take all necessary steps to collect the required
papers either from the pensioner or from the office so as to complete all the
formalities by the date, the pensioner is to retire.

To calculate all the retiral benefits including the pension and to pay the same
either on the same day or sanction the same when the pensioner retires or
immediately thereafter, but by all means within 60 days of the date of
retirement.

If the retiral benefits are not sanctioned/ paid even after expiry of 60 days
from the date of retirement invariably, unless there are exceptional
circumstances to act otherwise, the pensioner shall be entitled to the interest
at the rate of 12% p.a. from the due date till actual payment is made.

The Competent Authority shall fix the liability for the delay caused in
sanctioning the retiral benefits and, if it is found that the delay for sanctioning
the retiral benefits has been caused by the Erring Official, the same shall be
recovered from that official but so far the pensioner is concerned, he would
be paid the retiral benefits alongwith the interest if the same is paid after 60
days of the retirement. Efforts should be made to minimise filling number of
cases by the pensioners to avoid the unaviodable litigation.

Invariably it is the administrative office who should be held responsible for
completing the formalities and if once the formalities have been completed,
the Pension Department shall proceed forthwith to complete its own
obligations for getting the retiral benefits released. In case any delay is
caused in the Pension Department of the State of Rajasthan, responsibility
should be fixed for such delay and suitable action be taken against such
Erring Officials.

Where any "No Dues Certificate" is required, it shall be the responsibility of
the concerned authority in the office after verifying the record to issue such
"No Dues Certificate" to the official concerned for the reason that all the
service record including the details of any advance payment on any count
whatsoever and the last pay drawn particulars are already with the
Department.

Where retirement had been sought by issuing a notice for voluntary
retirement, in that situation all efforts be made to complete the papers during
the notice period before the employee is relieved or in any case within 60
days of the date of voluntary retirement and in case the retirement is sought
without any notice, the formalities of calculating the retiral benefits would be
completed within the same period i.e. 60 days from the date of retirement and
shall ensure the interest at the rate of 12% p.a., if retiral benefits are delayed
after 60 days on the date of retirement.

For the above purpose, the following procedure may further be adopted :-

In terms of the aforesaid judgement, a retiring employee would be entitled to
receive simple interest @ 12% per annum for the period of delay in the
authorisation of his retiral benefits.

111
 (b) In case of delay in authorisation of pension and gratuity beyond 60 days from
the date of retirement, the Director, Pension shall also authorise payment of
interest @ 12% per annum alongwith the other retiral benefits to the
employee.

(c) The Director, Pension shall send copies of authority for payment of interest
issued in favour of the pensioner to the office from which the pensioner
retired, the appointing authority, and the Administrative Secretary concerned
for holding preliminary enquiry to ascertain the officer(s)/ official(s) prima
facie responsible for causing the delay. Thereafter, the concerned Officer
shall initiate disciplinary action against the deiliquent employee(s) under the
CCA Rules and recover the amount of interest paid for the delay on the part
of such employee(s) from the concerned employee(s).

Kindly ensure strict compliance of the procedure, instructions and calendar
prescribed for the purpose under the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules 1996
and also the above guidelines and procedure."

90. Provisional pension where departmental or judicial proceedings may be
pending

(1) (a) In respect of a Government servant referred to in sub rule (4) of Rule 7, the
Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall authorise the provisional pension equal to
the maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of qualifying service
upto the date of retirement of the Government servant, or if he was under suspension on the
date of retirement upto the date immediately preceding the date on which he was placed
under suspension.

Provided that in cases where pension case could not be prepared finally for one or
the other reason the appointing authority shall sanction provisional pension in Form 33 after
following procedure laid down in sub-rule (3) of Rule 86 and send the case to the Director,
Pension for issue of Provisional Pension Payment Order till the Departmental Enquiry is
finalised.

(b) The provisional pension shall be authorised by the Director, Pension Department,
during the period commencing from the date of retirement upto and including the date on
which, after the conclusion of departmental or judicial proceedings, final orders are passed
by the competent authority.

(c) No gratuity shall be paid to the Government servant until the conclusion of the
departmental or judicial proceedings and issue of final orders thereon:

Provided that where departmental proceedings have been instituted under Rule 17 of
the Rajasthan Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, for imposing any of
the penalties specified in clauses(i) and (ii) of Rule 14 of the said Rules, the payment of
gratuity shall be authorised to be paid to the Government servant.

(2) Payment of provisional pension made under sub-rule (1) shall be adjusted
against final retirement benefits sanctioned to such Government servant upon conclusion of
such proceedings but no recovery shall be made where the pension finally sanctioned is
less than the provisional pension or the pension is reduced or withheld either permanently or
for a specified period.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

Grant of cent per cent provisional pension under Rule 90 mandatory even if
departmental or judicial proceedings are continued

See Government of Rajasthan’s Decision 5 below Rule 7.

112
 91. Revision of pension after authorisation

(1) Subject to the provisions of Rules 6 and 7 pension once authorised after final
assessment shall not be revised to the disadvantage of the Government servant, unless
such revision becomes necessary on account of detection of a clerical error subsequently:

Provided that no revision of pension to the disadvantage of the pensioner shall be
ordered by the Head of Office without the concurrence of Administrative Department and the
Finance Department if the clerical error is detected after a period of two years from the date
of authorisation of pension.

(2) For the purpose of sub rule (1), the retired Government servant concerned shall
be served with a notice by the Head of Office requiring him to refund the excess payment of
pension within a period of two months from the date of receipt of notice by him.

(3) In case the Government servant fails to comply with the notice, the Head of Office
shall, by order in writing, direct that such excess payment, shall be adjusted in instalments
by short payment of pension in future, in one or more instalments, as the Head of Office
may direct.

92. Recovery and adjustment of Government dues

(1) It shall be the duty of the Head of Office to ascertain and assess Government
dues payable by a Government servant due for retirement.

(2) The Government dues as ascertained and assessed by the Head of Office which
remain outstanding till the date of retirement of the Government servant, shall be adjusted
against the amount of the retirement gratuity becoming payable.

(3) The expression ‘Government dues’ includes -
(a) dues pertaining to Government accommodation including arrears of rent, if any;

(b) dues other than those pertaining to Government accommodation, namely,
balance of house building or conveyance or any other advance, overpayment
of pay and allowances or leave salary, dues of his office etc.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

राजकीय कर्मचारी से वसूली योग्य राशि यदि उसके सेवाकाल के दौरान वसूल नहीं होती है तो ऐसी
राशि राजस्थान सिविल सेवा (पेंशन) नियम, 1996 के नियम-92 के तहत कर्मचारी को सेवानिवृत्ति पर देय
उपदान में से समायोजित की जा सकती है |

प्राय: यह देखा गया है कि राजकीय कर्मचारी से, सेवा के दौरान अथवा सेवानिवृत्ति पर, बकाया राशि
वसूली करने के आदेश जारी करने से पूर्व कार्यालयाध्यक्ष,/विभागाध्यक्ष द्वारा वसूली योग्य राशि संबंधित राज्य
कर्मचारी को बिना सुनवाई का अवसर दिये सीधे की वसूली हेतु आदेश जारी कर दिये जाते है। राजकीय
कर्मचारी द्वारा ऐसे वसूली आदेशों को अधिकरण/न्यायालय के समक्ष चुनौती देने पर वसूली-आदेश

सामान्यतया इस आधार पर अपास्त हो जाते है कि आदेश जारी करते समय न्याय के नैसर्गिक agra की
पालना नहीं की गई तथा कर्मचारी को सुनवाई का मौका नहीं दिया गया |

1... Inserted vide FD Circular No.F.9(9)FD(Rules)/2000 dated 26.4.2001.

113
 अतः समस्त कार्यालयाध्यक्षों,/विभागाध्यक्षों से यह अपेक्षा की जाती है कि राजकीय कर्मचारी से
राजकीय बकाया राशि (इसमें कर्मचारी को भुगतान किये गए अधिक वेतन, भत्ते आदि जो नियमानुसार देय नहीं
थे की वसूली भी सम्मिलित है) की वसूली संबंधी आदेश जारी करने से पूर्व न्याय के नैसर्गिक Rear की
पालना करके सुनवाई का मौका देने के बाद वसूली योग्य राशि अभिनिश्चित/निर्धारित की जावें | तत्पश्चात्‌ ही
राशि वसूली संबंधी आदेश जारी किये जावें, ताकि अनावश्यक वादकरण न हो तथा वाद दायर होने पर
राजकीय पक्ष इस आधार पर कमजोर न रहें |”

93. Adjustment and recovery of dues pertaining to Government accommodation

(1) The Director of Estates/concerned Executive Engineer on receipt of intimation
from the Head of Office under sub rule (1) of Rule 79 regarding the issue of No Demand
Certificate shall scrutinize its records and inform the Head of Office eight months before the
date of retirement of the allottee, if any rent was recoverable from him in respect of the
period prior to eight months of his retirement. If no intimation in regard to recovery of
outstanding rent is received by the Head of Office by the stipulated date, it shall be
presumed that no rent was recoverable from the allottee in respect of the period preceding
eight months of his retirement provided that the Department had forwarded the application
for No Demand Certificate two years in advance and had obtained acknowledgement for the
same.

NOTES

1. The Advance No Demand Certificate shall be issued by the Directorate of
Estates/Public Works Department to the Department concerned eight months before the
date of superannuation incorporating:

(i) the amount of rent due upto that period, i.e. eight months prior to the date of
superannuation;

(ii) the monthly rate of recovery of rent for the rest of the service, i.e. eight
months; and

(iii) the amount of rent recoverable for the period of retention allowed as per
rules, after retirement.

A copy of the Advance No Demand Certificate shall be endorsed to the individual
concerned.

2. After the pension has been authorised, P.P.O number and the particulars of the
Treasury/Bank on which it is issued, will be intimated to the Directorate of Estates/Public
Works Department alongwith the permanent residential address of the retiring government
servant, by the Head of Office.

(2) The Head of Office shall ensure that rent for the next eight months, that is up to
the date of retirement of the allottee, is recovered every month from the pay and allowances
of the allottee.

(3) Where the Directorate of Estates/Public Works Department intimates the amount
of rent recoverable in respect of the period mentioned in sub rule (1), the Head of Office
shall ensure that outstanding rent is recovered in instalments from the current pay and
allowances of the allottee and where the entire amount is not recovered from the pay and
allowances, the balance shall be recovered out of the gratuity before its payment is
authorised.

114
 (4) The Directorate of Estates/Public Works Department shall also inform the Head
of Office the amount of rent for the retention of Government accommodation for the
permissible period beyond the date of retirement of the allottee. The Head of Office shall
adjust the amount of that rent from the amount of the gratuity together with the unrecovered
rent, if any, mentioned in sub rule (3).

(5) If in any particular case, it is not possible for the Directorate of Estates/Public
Works Department to determine the outstanding rent, that Department shall inform the Head
of Office that ten per cent of the gratuity or two thousand rupees in respect of non-gazetted
and five thousand rupees in respect of gazetted government servants, whichever is less,
may be withheld pending receipt of further information.

(6) The recovery of rent for the occupation of the Government accommodation
beyond the permissible period after the date of retirement of allottee shall be the responsi-
bility of the Directorate of Estates/Public Works Department. Any amount becoming due on
account of rent for retention of Government accommodation beyond permissible period after
retirement and remaining unpaid may be ordered to be recovered by the Directorate of
Estates/Public Works Department through the Director, Pension Department, from the
Dearness Relief without the consent of the pensioner. In such cases, no Dearness Relief
shall be disbursed until full recovery of such dues have been made.

(7) In case a Government accommodation is allotted to a Government servant after
forwarding of the list of retiring Government servants to Directorate of Estates/Public Works
Department under Rule 79, i.e. within two years of retirement, the allotting authority will
ensure raising of regular demand for recovery of rent, to the Head of Office, under whom he
is working. The Head of Office would be responsible to make recoveries accordingly. If in
any case, the entire dues could not be recovered from the salary bills, the Head of Office
shall include those unrecovered dues in the intimation to be sent to the Director, Pension
Department, under rule 85.

(8) In case recovery of rent is found / intimated by the Directorate of Estates /
PWD after issue of P.P.O. such dues shall be recoverable from the pension / family pension.

Notes: (1) For the purpose of this rule, the rent shall also include furniture rent,
garden rent and any other charges payable by the allottee for any
damage or loss caused by him to the accommodation or its fittings.

(2) In respect of Government servants vacating the Government
accommodation during service period, the issue of No Demand
Certificate should not be held up till the period of retirement.

94. Adjustment and recovery of dues other than dues pertaining to Government
Accommodation

(1) For the dues other than the dues pertaining to occupation of Government
accommodation as referred to in clause (b) of sub rule (3) of Rule 92, the Head of Office
shall take steps to assess the dues two years before the date on which a Government
servant is due to retire on superannuation; or on the date on which he proceeds on leave
preparatory to retirement, whichever is earlier.

(2) The assessment of Government dues referred to in sub rule (1) shall be
completed by the Head of Office eight months prior to the date of the retirement of the
Government servant.

(3) The dues as assessed under sub rule (2) including those which come to notice
subsequently and which remain outstanding till the date of retirement of the Government
servant, shall be adjusted against the amount of retirement gratuity becoming payable to the
Government servant on his retirement.

115
 PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN RESPECT OF DUES OF HOUSE BUILDING
AND CONVEYANCE ADVANCE

1. (i) The Head of Office shall forward to the concerned Treasury Officer a list of
Government servants alongwith applications of the concerned Government servants in Form
No.28 specifying advances taken by them, who are due to retire within the next two years
and have _ taken either House Building or Conveyance Advance or both the advances, with
request for -

(a) updating of ledgers of their personal accounts;

(b) intimation of missing credits, if any;

(c) issue of no dues certificate, in case the entire amount of advance together
with interest thereon has been paid;

(d) intimation of balance outstanding;

(e) intimation about the amount of advance set apart for adjustment against the
Gratuity.

He will also refer to the entries regarding drawal of long term advances made in the
Service Book of the concerned employee.

(ii) If the Government servant has not taken any long term advance he will certify the
same in Form 28 A.

(iii) A copy of Form 28 or Form 28 A, as the case may be, shall be attached with
Form 7-form for assessing pension and gratuity to be sent to the Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan under Rule 83.

2. The Head of Office, on receipt of any intimation from the concerned Treasury
Officer seeking any information or details, shall supply necessary details as may be
available in his office or after obtaining from previous office or offices or from the
Government servant concerned.

3. The Treasury Officer shall, eight months before the date of retirement of a
Government servant, intimate-

(a) the amount outstanding till that date;

(b) the amount to be recovered from the monthly salary for the eight months
following;

(c) the amount set apart for adjustment from the Retirement Gratuity; and
(d) any other relevant information.

4. The Head of Office shall be responsible for making the above recoveries from
the salary of the Government servant concerned or intimating the Director, Pensions
Department, Rajasthan, as per provisions of Rule 85 for recovering the amount from
Gratuity. A copy of the intimation received by the Head Office from the Treasury Officer shall
be attached with the pension papers.

5. The Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall be responsible to effect
recoveries of balance amount as intimated by the Treasury Officer, from the Gratuity
Payment Order, or in case no amount is left over to be paid as gratuity, from the monthly
pension, in suitable instalments, not exceeding one-third of the pension every month.

Note:- The concerned Treasury Officer is required to issue No Dues Certificate in
respect of Long Term Advance immediately after payment of last instalment
of interest and he will not, in any case, postpone the issuing of No Dues
Certificate till the receipt of request of the Head of Office/Government servant
as provided in above Procedure or till the retirement of the Government
servant.

116
 GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Obtaining of no dues certificates from the Motor Garage and District Pool has been
dispensed with by the Government. However, if any dues are intimated by these
departments to the concerned Head of Office, the same may be recovered from the gratuity
payable to the Government servant, if recoveries cannot be made from the pay.

2. Release of amount withheld from gratuity

The withheld amount from gratuity i.e. 10% of the gratuity or Rs.2,000 or Rs.5,000,
as the case may be, whichever is less, will be indicated in the Gratuity Payment Order itself.
The Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall incorporate directions to the Disbursing
Officer that, in absence of instruction to the contrary, the withheld amount may be released
without further instructions on the expiry of period of six months from the date of retirement.

3. (1) Statement required to be maintained for proper monitoring and reporting
system

In simplifying the procedure with a view to eliminate delays in the payment of
superannuation pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity, Government have proceeded
on the basis that inspite of every effort imperfections may remain in the records and proce-
dures but that it would be unfair to a retiring Government servant if he had to suffer because
of the lapses of those responsible for the proper maintenance of service records. The fact
that under the new procedures the presumption will be in favour of the Government servant
if the records are incomplete or deficient in any manner underlines the importance of
ensuring the proper, regular, and timely completion of all the service and accounts records
by the offices concerned, so as to minimize the occasion for making such presumptions. It
has, accordingly, been decided that if, in future, service records are found to be incomplete
or imperfect at the time of processing and finalizing pension cases, those cases will not be
delayed but the officials responsible for the maintenance of the records will be held
accountable for any deficiencies, failure or omissions therein, and action will be initiated
against them. The Head of Departments will ensure that these directions are complied with.

(2) In order to ensure that the payment of pension should in all cases commence on
the first of the month in which they are due, it has been decided that the progress of the
pension cases should be watched by the Head of the Offices and the Head of the
Departments by means of monthly and quarterly statements so that the various cut-off dates
laid down are strictly followed. For proper monitoring and reporting system the Heads of
Offices shall prepare the following statements (Form No.26 (1 to 4)).

Statement No. 1: This is monthly statement and should cover cases of all
Government servants due to retire within the succeeding 8 months and indicate the
progress of the pension cases with reference to the various stages and time-limit prescribed,
i.e., whether action was initiated two years in advance and whether the pension papers are
ready for being sent to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan before 6 months of the
retirement of the Government servant. The statement should be submitted by the Head of
Office to the next higher officer.

Statement No.2: This is monthly statement having Part | and Part Il and the
statement should cover the cases of Government servants who became due for retirement
in the previous calendar month. Part | and Part Il of the statement should be submitted by
the Head of Office to the next higher officer. The next higher officer will submit Part || of the
statement to the Head of the Department. Where next higher officer is the Head of
Department, Part | and Part Il both shall be submitted, duly filled in, to the Head of Depart-
ment.

117
 Statement No.3: This is a quarterly statement and should indicate the particulars of
those Government servants where presumptions have been made in favour of retired
Government servant because of incomplete/improper maintenance of service records. The
names of the persons responsible for improper maintenance of the record of service books
and action taken against the Government servant concerned responsible for lapse should
also be indicated. The statement is to be submitted to the Head of Department.

Statement No.4: This is half-yearly statement to be submitted by the Head of
Department to the Secretary of the Administrative Department concerned.

(3) Any case where payment of pension is delayed, has to be viewed seriously. The
causes of delay in such a case have to be identified and remedial steps taken so that such
delays should not occur in future. This can only be ensured if the Heads of the Departments
will personally scrutinize the statements and issue such directions as they may consider
necessary where payments of pensions have been delayed. Any deficiency in the procedure
should be brought to the notice of the Finance Department at the appropriate level so that
rules may be amended accordingly.

(4) For proper monitoring of pension cases, the senior most member of the
Rajasthan Account Service posted in the concerned department shall be the Nodal Officer
on behalf of the Head of the Department.

(5) Government views it with serious concern any delay in the finalization of pension
cases of the retiring government servants. If the pension cases are processed in
accordance with the procedure laid down in this Chapter, there is no reason why a
Government servant should not get his Pension Payment Order and Gratuity Payment
Order on the day of retirement. Government will not hesitate in taking disciplinary action
against those Officers/Officials who are found lacking or wanting in implementing these
rules, resulting in delay of pension cases. It has further been decided that in case there is
any litigation on account of non release of pension on the date of the retirement of any
Government servant, the cost of that litigation shall be recovered from the defaulting
Officer(s).

118
 B - FAMILY PENSION AND DEATH GRATUITY
in respect of Government servants dying while in service

95. Obtaining of claims for family pension and death gratuity

(1) Where the Head of Office has received an intimation about the death of a
Government servant while in service, he shall ascertain whether any death gratuity or family
pension or both is or are payable in respect of the deceased Government servant.

(2) (a) Where the family of the deceased Government servant is eligible for the
death gratuity under Rule 55, the Head of Office shall ascertain-

(i) if the deceased Government servant had nominated any person or
persons to receive the gratuity; and

(ii) 116 deceased Government servant had not made any nomination
or the nomination made does not subsist, the person or persons to
whom the gratuity may be payable.

(b) The Head of Office shall, then, address the person concerned in Form 10
or Form 11, as may be appropriate, for making a claim in Form 12.

(3) Where the family of the deceased Government servant is eligible under Ch. VC
for the Family Pension-

(a) the Head of Office shall address the widow or widower in Form 13 for
making a claim in Form 14 alongwith necessary documents, and

(b) where the deceased Government servant is survived only by a child or
children the guardian of such child or children may submit a claim in Form
14 alongwith necessary documents to the Head of Office:

Provided that the guardian shall not be required to submit a claim in the said Form
on behalf of a child if the child has attained the age of eighteen years and such child may
himself or herself submit a claim in the said Form.

(4) If on the date of death, the Government servant was an allottee of Government
accommodation, the Head of Office shall address the Public Works Department/ Directorate
of Estates for the issue of “No Demand Certificate” in accordance with the provisions of sub-
rule (1) of Rule 101.

96. Completion of Form 18

(1) (a) The Head of Office while taking action to obtain claim or claims from the
family in accordance with the provisions of Rule 95 shall simultaneously
undertake the completion of Form 18. The work shall be completed within
one month of the date on which intimation regarding the date of death of
the Government servant has been received.

(b) The Head of Office shall go through the service book of the deceased
Government servant and satisfy himself as to whether certificates of
verification of service for the entire service are recorded therein.

(c) If there are any periods of unverified service, the Head of Office shall
accept the unverified portion of service as verified on the basis of the
available entries in the service book. For this purpose the Head of Office
may rely on any other relevant material to which he may have ready
access. While accepting the unverified portion of service, the Head of
Office shall ensure that service was continuous and was not forfeited on
account of dismissal, removal or resignation from service, or for
participation in strike.

119
 (2) For the purpose of determination of emoluments for family pension and death
gratuity, the Head of Office shall verify from the Service Book, the correctness of
emoluments drawn by the Government servant immediately before his death.

The Head of Office will obtain/record certificates in the Service Book as prescribed in
Rule 81 (1) (b) (iii) to (v).

(3) The process of determination of qualifying service and qualifying emoluments
shall be completed within one month of the receipt of intimation regarding the date of death
of the Government servant and the amount of family pension and death gratuity shall also
be calculated accordingly.

(4) He will issue a final Last Pay Certificate in Form 31, to be attached with Form-18.

97. Determination of the amount of family pension and gratuity where service
records are incomplete

lf, in any particular case, the service book has not been maintained properly despite
the Government’s orders on the subject, and it is not possible for the Head of Office to
accept the unverified portion of service as verified on the basis of entries in the service
book, the Head of Office shall not proceed with the verification of the entire spell of service.
The verification of service in such a case shall be confined to the followed spells of service:-

(a) For the purpose of Family Pension -

(i) 1116 deceased Government servant on the date of death had rendered
more than one year of service but less than seven years of service, the
service and emoluments for the last year of service shall be verified and
accepted by the Head of Office and the amount of Family Pension,
determined under Rules 61 and 62 (i).

(ii) If the deceased Government servant on the date of his death had
rendered more than seven years of service, the service for the last
seven years and emoluments drawn by the Government servant
immediately before his death shall be verified and accepted by the
Head of Office after obtaining/recording certificates in the service book
as prescribed in rule 81 (1) (b) (iii) to (v) and the amount of Family
Pension, and the period for which it is payable shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 62 (ii) and 62 (iii).

(iii) 116 deceased Government servant at the time of death had rendered
more than seven years of service and the service of last seven years is
not capable of being verified and accepted by the Head of Office but the
service rendered during the last year is capable of being verified and
accepted, the Head of Office, pending the verification of service for
seven years, shall calculate the amount of family pension in accordance
with the provisions of Rules 61 and 62 (i).

(iv) The service for the last seven years shall be verified and accepted
within the next two months and the amount of family pension at the
enhanced rate and the period for which it is payable shall be
determined in accordance with the provisions of Rule 62 (ii) and (iii).

(v) The determination of the amount of family pension in accordance with
the provisions of sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) shall be done within one
month of the receipt of intimation of the date of death of the
Government servant.

120
 (b) For the purpose of death gratuity -

(i) If the deceased Government servant had on the date of his death
rendered more than 5 years of qualifying service but less than 20 years
of qualifying service, and the spell of last 5 years has been verified and
accepted by the Head of Office under clause (a), the amount of death
gratuity shall be equal of 12 times of his emoluments as indicated in
Item (iii) of the Table below clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 55. Where
the verified and accepted service is less than 5 years, the amount of
death gratuity shall be the amount as indicated in Item (i) or Item (ii) in
the Table below clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 55, as may be ap-
plicable.

(ii) If the deceased Government servant had rendered more than twenty
years of service and the entire service is not capable of being verified
and accepted, but the service for the last five years has been verified
and accepted under sub-clause (i), the family of the deceased
Government servant shall be allowed, on provisional basis, the death
gratuity equal to 12 times of the emoluments. Final amount of the
gratuity shall be determined by the Head of Office on the acceptance
and verification of the entire spell of service which shall be done by the
Head of Office within a period of six months from the date on which the
authority for the payment of provisional gratuity was issued. The
balance, if any, becoming payable as a result of determination of the
final amount of death gratuity shall then be authorised to the
beneficiaries.

98. Forwarding the papers to the Director, Pension Department

(1) On receipt of claim or claims, the Head of Office shall complete items 24, 25, 26,
27 and 28 of Form 18 and send the said Form in original to the Director Pension with a
covering letter in Form 19 along with the Government servant's service book duly completed
up-to-date and any other documents relied upon for the verification of the service claimed.
This shall be done not later than one month of the receipt of claim by the Head of Office.

(2) The Head of Office shall retain one copy of the aforesaid Form 18 for his office
record.

(3) If the payment is desired in another circle of accounting unit, Form 18 shall be
sent in duplicate to the Director Pension.

(4) The Head of Office shall draw the attention of the Director Pension to the details
of Government dues outstanding against the deceased Government servant, namely,-

(a) Government dues as ascertained and assessed in terms of Rule 101 and
recoverable out of the gratuity before payment is authorised.

(b) Amount of gratuity to be held over partly for adjustment of Government dues
which have not been assessed so far and partly as a margin for adjustment in
the light of the final determination of the gratuity.

(c) The maximum amount of gratuity to be held over for the purpose of clause (b)
shall be limited to ten per cent of the amount of gratuity or rupees one
thousand/rupees two thousands, as the case may be, whichever is less.

(5) (a) If Form 18 has been completed and the claim or claims in the respective
Forms have not been received from the beneficiary or beneficiaries, the
Head of Office shall forward Form 18 and the documents referred to in
sub-rule (1) to the Director Pension leaving unfilled items 24, 25, 26, 27
and 28 of Part | of the said Form.

121
 (b) As soon as the claim or claims are received by Head of Office, they
shall immediately be forwarded to the Director Pension with the request
that items 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 of Part | of Form 18 may be filled by the
Director Pension.

99. Sanction, drawal and disbursement of provisional family pension and gratuity

(1) On receiving the application along with necessary documents from the family of
deceased Government servant, the Head of Office, after most careful summary
investigations, issue a sanction in form 33 addressed to the Director Pension indicating the
amount of family pension to which the family of the deceased Government servant is entitled
to receive under these rules. Provisional Payment of Death Gratuity is not admissible under
this sub rule. The amount of provisional family pension can be revised on the basis of
assessment made on forwarding of the claim and papers to the Director Pension
Department under rule 98.

(2) After the documents referred in rule 98 have been sent to the Director Pension
Department, the Head of Office shall sanction provisional family pension not exceeding the
maximum family pension and 75% of the gratuity as determined in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. For this purpose the Head of Office shall adopt the following
procedure namely:-

(a) he shall issue a sanction in form 33 addressed to the
Director, Pension Department indicating the amount of-

(i) | Provisional family pension if no sanction has been issued under sub
rule (1),

(ii) Revised provisional family pension in case provisional family pension
has been sanctioned under sub rule (1), and

(iii) 75% of the gratuity as provisional gratuity.

(b) he shall indicate in the sanction letter the amount recoverable out of the
gratuity under sub-rule (4) of Rule 98;

(3) On receipt of sanction of provisional Family Pension from the Head of office, the
Director, Pension Department shall issue provisional Pension Payment Order and Gratuity
Payment Order within a week positively.

100. Authorisation of final pension and balance of the gratuity by the Director
Pension

(1) On receipt of the documents referred to in sub-rule (1) of Rule 98, the Director
Pension shall, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the documents
apply the requisite checks and complete Section | of Part Il of Form 18 and assess the
amount of family pension and gratuity:

(2) (a) _ If the family pension is payable in Rajasthan, the Director Pension shall
prepare the pension payment order.

(b) The payment of family pension shall be effective from the date following
the date on which the payment of provisional family pension ceased.

(c) Arrears of family pension, if any, in respect of the period for which
provisional family pension was paid shall also be authorised by the
Director Pension.

122
 (3) (a) The Director Pension shall determine the amount of the balance of the
gratuity after adjusting the amount, if any, outstanding against the
deceased Government servant and issue a Gratuity Payment Order on
the Treasury/Pension Payment Officer.

(b) The amount of gratuity withheld under clause (v) of sub rule (1) of Rule
101 shall be adjusted by the Director, Pension Department against the
outstanding rent mentioned in clause (viii) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 101
and the balance, if any, refunded to the person or persons to whom
gratuity has been paid.

(4) The fact of the issue of the Pension Payment Order shall be promptly reported to
the Head of Office by the Director Pension and the documents which are no longer required
shall also be returned to him.

(5) If the final family pension including the arrears of provisional family pension is
payable in another circle of accounting unit, the Director Pension shall send the Pension
Payment Order together with a copy of Form 18, duly completed to the Accounts Officer of
that unit for arranging payment through the Accountant General, Rajasthan:

Provided that the adjustment of provisional family pension paid shall be made by the
Director Pension.

(6) If the amount of provisional family pension is found to be in excess of the final
family pension assessed by the Director Pension, it shall be open to the Director Pension to
adjust the excess amount out of the balance amount of gratuity payable or in instalments by
short payments of family pension payable in future, irrespective of whether the consent of
the pensioner has been obtained or not.

(7) If the amount of provisional death gratuity paid to the family of the deceased
Government servant is found to be in excess of final gratuity assessed by the Director
Pension, the family shall be called upon to refund such excess in the manner as may be
specified by the Director Pension or recover the same from family pension payable in future,
irrespective of whether the consent of the pensioner has been obtained or not.

101. Adjustment of Government dues

(1) Dues pertaining to Government accommodation-

(i) If on the date of death the Government servant was allottee of Government
accommodation, the Head of Office on receipt of intimation regarding the death
of the Government servant shall within seven days of the receipt of such
intimation, write to the Directorate of Estate/Public Works Department for the
issue of ‘No Demand Certificate’ so that authorisation of family pension and
death gratuity is not delayed. While addressing the Directorate of Estate/Public
Works Department for the issue of no demand certificate, the Head of Office
shall also supply the following information:-

(a) name of the deceased Government servant with designation;

(b) particulars of the accommodation (quarter No., type and locality);

(c) date of death of Government servant;

(d) whether the Government servant was on leave at the time of his death
and, if so, the period and nature of leave;

(e) whether the Government servant was enjoying rent-free accommodation;

(f) the period up to which rent had been recovered from the pay and
allowances of the deceased Government servant and the monthly rate of
recovery and particulars of the pay bill under which last recovery was
made;

123
 (ii)
(iii)

(iv)

(vi)

(vii)

(g) if the rent had not been recovered up to the date of death and the family
intends to retain Government accommodation for the permissible period
from the date of death of the Government servant, details of the-

(A) period for which rent still remains to be recovered;

(B) the amount of rent in respect of the period at (A) to be
determined on the basis of the standard rent bill;

(C) the amount of rent for the retention of Government
accommodation by the family of the deceased Government
servant for the concessional period beyond the date of death
of the Government servant to be determined on the basis of
standard bill;

(D) the amount of rent mentioned at (B) and (C) proposed to be
recovered out of death gratuity;

(E) details of any previous reference from the Directorate of
Estate/Public Works Department having bearing on the recov-
ery of rent outstanding against the allottee and action taken
thereon.

The amount of rent as intimated to the Directorate of Estate / Public Works
Department under clause (i), rent shall be recovered from death gratuity.

The recovery of rent for the occupation of Government accommodation beyond
the permissible period shall be the responsibility of the Directorate of
Estate/Public Works Department.

The Directorate of Estate/Public Works Department shall scrutinize their
records with a view to determine if rent other than the rent referred to in clause
(i) was outstanding against deceased Government servant. If any recovery is
found, the amount and the periods to which such recovery or recoveries relate
shall be communicated to the Head of Office within a period of three months of
the receipt of intimation regarding the death of the Government servant under
clause (i).

Pending receipt of information under clause (iv), ten per cent of the death
gratuity or two thousand in respect of Non-gazetted Government servant /five
thousands rupees in respect of Gazetted Government servant, whichever is
less, shall be withheld.

If no intimation is received by the Head of Office within the period prescribed
under clause (iv) regarding recovery of rent, it shall be presumed that nothing
was recoverable from the deceased Government servant provided that an
acknowledgement had been obtained of the intimation sent under clause (i)
and the amount of gratuity withheld shall be paid to the person or persons to
whom the amount of death gratuity was paid.

If the Head of Office has received intimation from the Directorate of
Estate/Public Works Department under clause (iv) regarding rent outstanding
against the deceased Government servant, the Head of Office, shall verify from
the acquittance rolls if the outstanding amount of rent was recovered from the
pay and allowances of the deceased Government servant. If as a result of
verification it is found that the amount of rent shown as outstanding by the
Directorate of Estate/P.W.D. had already been recovered, the Head of Office
shall draw the attention of the Directorate of Estate/P.W.D. to the pay bills
under which the necessary recovery of the rent was made and subject to the
provisions of sub-rule (2) write to the Director Pension to authorise the release
of the amount of the gratuity withheld under clause (v) to the person or persons
to whom the death gratuity was paid.

124
 (viii) If the outstanding amount of rent was not recovered from the pay and
allowances of the deceased Government servant, the Head of Office shall
request the Director Pension that the outstanding amount may be adjusted
against the amount of the gratuity with held under clause (v) and the balance, if
any be authorised to be re-paid to the person to whom the amount of death
gratuity was paid.

(2) Dues other than those referred to in sub-rule (1)-

The Head of Office shall, within one month of the receipt of intimation regarding
death of a Government servant, take steps to ascertain if any dues as referred to in Rule 92
excluding the dues pertaining to the allotment of Government accommodation and balance
of House Building Advance were recoverable from the deceased Government servant. Such
ascertainable dues shall be recovered from the amount of death gratuity becoming payable
to the family of the deceased Government servant.

102. Payment of family pension and death gratuity when a Government servant dies
while on deputation

In the case of a Government servant who dies while on deputation to other
State/Central Government or while on foreign service, action to authorise the payments of
family pension and death gratuity in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be
taken by the Head of Office of the cadre authority which sanctioned the deputation of the
Government servant.

103. Procedure to be adopted for grant of family pension under provisos to rule 61
of Family Pension Rules

(a) The member or members of the family entitled to family pension in case of a
missing pensioner or unheared of a Government servant shall apply to the
Head of Office as required under provisos to Rule 61 in the prescribed form.
Forms of application, indemnity bond and affidavit bear Nos. 15/16, 15A/16A,
15B/16B respectively.

(b) The Head of Office on receipt of an application, in proper form, shall look into
the genuineness of the claim, verify the facts, obtain Police investigation
report on the F.I.R. from the respective police authority and forward the appli-
cation for issue of pension payment order of family pension to the Director,
Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.

(c) On receipt of the application form, from the Head of Office, the Director,
Pension Department, Rajasthan, shall also examine the application and other
documents furnished in support of the claim regarding admissibility and grant
of family pension and on being satisfied, he shall issue Pension Payment
Order to the member or members of the family for grant of family pension.

104. Endorsement of the family pension entitlement of post retiral spouses in the
Pension Payment Order of pensioners

(a) As and when a pensioner marries or remarries after retirement, he shall
intimate in the prescribed Form 30 for the event to the Head of Office who
processed his pension papers at the time of his retirement. He shall also
furnish alongwith his application an attested copy of the marriage certificate
from the Registrar/Gram Panchayat/District Magistrate in respect of his post-
retirement marriage.

(b) The Head of Office on receipt of application in Form 30 after due verification
forward papers to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur for
issue of corrigendum to the Pension Payment Order. If the pensioner has any
eligible child or children from another wife, who is not alive, the family
pension shall be divided between the eligible child of the wife, who is not alive
and the post retiral spouse and her children.

125
 105.

The corrigendum Pension Payment Order shall be forwarded by the Director,
Pension Department, to the concerned Pension Payment Officer, and’ a
copy of the corrigendum Pension Payment Order shall be endorsed to the
pensioner.

Procedure in respect of ex gratia grant under Rule 75

(a)

(b)

An application for ex gratia grant to the family of a Government servant who
dies while on duty in certain circumstances under Rule 75 ए Chapter V C
Family Pension Rules, shall be made by the member of his/her family who is
entitled for grant of family pension in Form 17, within a period of one year
from the date of death as provided in the above rules, failing which the same
shall not be entertained by the Head of Department.

The expenditure on this account shall be debited to the budget Head -

2071 - Pension and other Retirement Benefits
01 - Civil
104 - Gratuities
(ii) - Ex gratia grant on death of Government servants while on duty

“Provided that the expenditure on account of ex-gratia granted by the
Collector of the District under sub-rule (5) of Rule 75 shall be charged to the
Budget Head of the Election.”

The amount of ex gratia grant shall be drawn by the Head of Office from the
Treasury on a simple receipt form on the basis of the sanction issued by the
Head of the Department and make payment of the grant to the member of the
family of the deceased Government servant. No authority from the Director,
Pension Department, Rajasthan will be required for such payment.

The Head of Department should ensure that payment of ex gratia grant is
made within 10 days of the date of receipt of complete application.

The ex gratia grant to the employees of the Central Government,
Undertakings of Centre or State, Statutory Corporations, Local Bodies,
Autonomous Bodies, Cooperative Societies, R.B.I., Nationalised Banks etc.
and Home Guard personnel who die while on election duty, shall be granted
by the Collector of the concerned district to the member of the family of the
deceased who is entitled to receive the Death Gratuity as per relevant rules.
The eligible member of the family shall apply to the Collector concerned in
Form 17. The amount shall be drawn by the Collector from the Treasury on a
simple receipt form on the basis of sanction issued, by debiting the Budget
head to which election expenses are debited.

The ex gratia grant to the family of a Volunteer, Home Guard who dies while
on duty in the circumstances mentioned in clauses (b) to (e) of sub rule (1) of
Rule 75 shall be granted by the Director General, Home Guard & Civil
Defence, on fulfillment of the conditions mentioned in the rules. The payment
shall be made to the widow/minor children of the deceased. Application for
the same shall be submitted by the person eligible to receive the grant to the
Director General, Home Guard & Civil Defence. The amount shall be drawn
by the Director General from the Treasury on a simple receipt form on the
basis of sanction issued and shall be debited to the Budget Head to which the
allowances paid to Home Guard Volunteers are debited.

Inserted vide FD Notification No.F.15(7)FD(Rules)/98 dated 19.05.2007.

126
 106. Procedure in respect of ex gratia grant under rule 76

(a)

(b)

(०)
(५)

(e)

(f)

An application for ex gratia grant shall be made by the member of a
deceased Government Servant’s family who is entitled for the grant of family
pension, in Form 17, within a period of one year from the date of death, to the
Director General of Police/Director, Civil Defence & Commandant General,
Home Guards, as the case may be, failing which the application shall not be
entertained.

The Director General of Police/Director, Civil Defence & Commandant
General Home Guards, as the case may be, shall forward the application
alongwith details of the incident and his comments to the Secretary to the
Government, Home Department, Rajasthan.

The ex-gratia grant shall be sanctioned by the Secretary to the Government,
Home Department.

The amount of ex-gratia grant shall be drawn by the Head of Office from the
Treasury on a simple receipt form on the basis of sanction issued by the
Secretary to Government, Home Department. No authority from the Director,
Pension Department, will be required for this purpose.

In respect of Forestry Personnel, the application for ex-gratia grant shall be
made to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest who will forward the same
with his comments to the Secretary to Government, Forest Department, who
will be the sanctioning authority in their cases.

In respect of a Volunteer of Civil Defence & Home Guards, application for ex-
gratia grant shall be submitted to the Director Civil Defence & Commandant
General, Home Guards, who will forward the same to the Secretary to
Government, Home Department, for obtaining sanction. The amount shall be
drawn by the Director, Civil Defence and Commandant General, Home
Guards, by debiting the Budget Head to which the allowances paid to such
Volunteers are debited.

C- FAMILY PENSION AND RESIDUARY GRATUITY
IN RESPECT OF DECEASED PENSIONERS

107. Sanction of family pension and residuary gratuity on the death of a pensioner

(1) Where the Head of Office has received an intimation regarding the death of a
retired Government servant who was in receipt of pension, he shall ascertain whether any
family pension or residuary gratuity or both is or are payable in respect of the deceased

pensioner:

Provided that the Head of Office may, when he considers it necessary so to do,
consult the Director, Pension Department.

(2)

(A) (४). If the deceased pensioner is survived by a widow or widower who is

eligible for the grant of family pension, under Rules 66 and 67, the
amount of family pension, as indicated in the Pension Payment
Order shall become payable to the widow or widower, as the case
may be, from the day following the date of death of the pensioner.

(ii) On receipt of a claim in Form 14 from the widow or widower, the
Pension Disbursing Authority from whom the deceased pensioner
was drawing his or her pension shall authorise the payment of
family pension, to the widow or widower, as the case may be.

127
 (C)

(D)

(ii)

(iv)

(i)

The Pension Disbursing Authority shall, after authorising the
payment of family pension to the widow/widower, inform the fact to
the Director, Pension Department, in Form 29.

Where the deceased pensioner is survived by child or children, the
guardian of the child or children may submit a claim in Form 14 to
the Head of Office for the payment of family pension:

Provided that the guardian shall not be required to submit a claim in
the said Form on behalf of the son or unmarried daughter if he or
she has attained the age of eighteen years and such a person may
himself or herself submit a claim in the said Form.

On receipt of a claim from the guardian, the Head of Office shall
sanction the family pension in Form 20.

Where a widow or widower in receipt of family pension, remarries
and has, at the time of remarriage, child or children from the former
spouse who is or are eligible for family pension, the remarried
individual shall be eligible to draw the family pension, on behalf of
such child or children if such individual continues to be the guardian
of such child or children.

For the purposes of sub-clause (i), the remarried individual shall
apply to the Head of Office on plain paper furnishing the following
particulars, namely :-

a declaration that the applicant continues to be the guardian of such
child or children;

the date of remarriage;

the name and date of birth of the child or children from the former
spouse;

the pension disbursing authority from where payment of family
pension, on behalf of such child or children is desired;

full postal address of the applicant.

If the remarried individual has, for any reason, ceased to be the
guardian of such child or children, the family pension, shall become
payable to the person entitled to act as guardian of such child or
children under the law for the time being in force and such person
may submit a claim in Form 14 to the Head of Office for the
payment of family pension:

Provided that the guardian shall not be required to submit a claim in
the said Form on behalf of the son or unmarried daughter if he or
she has attained the age of eighteen years and such person may
himself or herself submit a claim in the said Form.

On receipt of the claim referred to in sub-rule (iii), the Head of Office
shall sanction family pension in Form 21.

Where a widow or widower in receipt of family pension, dies and
leaves behind child or children who is or are eligible for family
pension, the guardian may submit a claim in Form 14 to the Head of
Office for the payment of family pension:

Provided that the guardian shall not be required to submit a claim in
the said Form on behalf of the son or unmarried daughter if he or
she has attained the age of eighteen years and such a person may
himself or herself submit claim in the said Form.

128
 (ii) On receipt of a claim under sub clause (i), the Head of Office shall
sanction family pension in Form 21.

(3) Where on the death of a retired Government servant a residuary gratuity
becomes payable to the family of the deceased under sub rule (2) of Rule 55, the Head of
Office shall sanction its payment on receipt of a claim or claims in Form 22 from the person
or persons eligible to receive the residuary gratuity.

108. Authorisation of payment by Director, Pension Department
On receipt of the sanction under Rule 107 regarding the payment of family pension

or of residuary gratuity or of both, the Director, Pension Department shall authorise the
payment of the same.

KR RK RR K

129
 CHAPTER VII

SPECIAL PENSIONARY AWARDS
109. Applicability

The rules in this Chapter shall apply to the following categories of Government
servants on pensionable establishment whether temporary or permanent -

(1) Police personnel whether in regular or irregular units including R.A.C. upto the
rank of Commandant & Superintendent of Police (other than IPS officers) who -

(i) die as a result of encounter with dacoits,

(ii) killed while on duty, including Class IV servants followers & other non-
combatant staff attached to Police Force,

(iii) die as a result of encounter with criminals or in the course of confrontation
with mobs or crowds during agitation, riot or disturbances etc.

(2) Personnel of Preventive Branch of the Excise Department upto the rank of Excise
Officer (Preventive) who are killed or die as a result of injury sustained while undertaking
raids.

110. Applicability of Award

Award at the rates specified in Rule 111 shall be granted under this Chapter to the
family of -

(a) Police personnel who while in service are killed or die under any of the
circumstances mentioned in the relevant clauses of Rule 109;

(b) Personnel of Preventive branch of the Excise Department who while in
service are killed or die under the circumstance mentioned in clause (2) of
Rule 109.

111. Amount of Award

Subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, the amount of Award and
concessions admissible under this Chapter will be as follows :-

(i) Death Gratuity as admissible under Chapter V-B.

(ii) If the Government servant is survived by the widow, family pension equal to
the emoluments last drawn by the deceased Government servant. The said
family pension shall be payable upto the date when the deceased would have
attained the age of superannuation had he survived or her remarriage
whichever is earlier.

(iii) When family pension ceases to be payable on attaining the age of
superannuation of the deceased Government servant had he survived, under
clause (ii) above, the family pension shall be paid equal to half of the
maximum of the scale in which pay was being drawn by the deceased
Government servant in substantive, officiating or temporary capacity, for life
or until her re-marriage, whichever is earlier.

(iv) Children of the deceased shall be entitled to the facility of free education in
Government Schools and Colleges within Rajasthan, to the same extent as
permissible to the children of low paid Government Servants, according to
rules thereon.

(v) The family of the deceased shall be paid a sum of Rs. 2,000 for meeting
expenses on the funeral rites of the deceased Government servant.

130
 (vii)

‘(viii)

(ix)

(x)

In cases where the amount of Special Pensionary Award admissible under
clause (ii) or (iii) of the Rule 111, falls short of minimum family pension
payable under Chapter V-C, Special Pensionary Award shall be paid at the
rate of minimum family pension under Chapter V-C.

(a) In the event of remarriage of the widow, family pension will be allowed
to the eligible members at the rates of family pension & subject to the
conditions laid down for family pension under Chapter V-C from the
date following the date of remarriage of the widow.

(b) In the event of death of the widow who has been granted family
pension, the family pension will be allowed to the eligible members of
the family at the rates and conditions laid down in clause (viii) below.

If the Government servant is not survived by a widow, but is survived by child/
children only, all children together shall be eligible for family pension @ 60%
of emoluments subject to minimum of Rs. 2500/-.

The above family pension shall be payable to child / children for the
period during which they would have been eligible for family pension under
Chapter V-C. The family pension shall be paid to the senior most eligible child
at a time on the lines on which the family pension is regulated under
Chapter V-C.

Where the Government servant dies as a bachelor or as a widower without
children, dependent pension would be admissible to the parents @ 75% of
emoluments last drawn, if both parents are alive and @ 60% of emoluments
if only one of them is alive.”

Where the family pension or dependent pension is allowed in terms of these
orders, no other family pension or dependent pension will be admissible
under any other orders or rules in consideration of death of the same
deceased Government servant.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

The Governor is pleased to order that the Special Pensionary Award sanctioned to
the families of Government servants under Chapter XXIIl 8 of Rajasthan Service Rules will
be consolidated with effect from 1.9.1996 in accordance with the provisions contained in
Finance Department Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998 subject to the
condition laid down therein.”

1.

The existing clause (viii) and (ix) substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/99 dated 14.7.2000 w.e.f. 1.10.1996. The
provisions regarding consequential amendment in Rajasthan Service Rules, non-accrual of arrears and mode of payment of arrears
shall be as contained in Finance Department Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998

"(viii

If the Government servant is not survived by widow, but is survived by child/children only, all children together shall be
eligible for family pension at the following rates -

Emoluments of Government servant Monthly Family Pension
on the date of death

(i) | Not exceeding Rs.1500 50% of emoluments
(ii) | Exceeding Rs.1500 but not 40% of emoluments subject to
exceeding Rs.3000 minimum of Rs.750
(iii) Exceeding Rs.3000 30% of emoluments subject to
a minimum of Rs.1200 & maximum
of Rs.2500/-.

The above family pension shall be payable to child/children for the period during which they would have been eligible for

family pension under Chapter V-C. The family pension shall be paid to the senior-most eligible child at a time on the lines on which
the family pension is regulated under Chapter V-C.

(ix)

Where the Government servant dies as a bachelor or as a widower without children, dependent pension will be admissible
to the parents without reference to the pecuniary circumstances at 75 percent of the emoluments last drawn by the
deceased Government servant for both parents and 56.25 percent of the emoluments last drawn by the deceased
Government servant for a single parent. On the death of one parent, dependent pension at the later rate will be admissible
to the surviving parent. The dependent pension at these rates shall be payable upto the date when the deceased
Government servant would have attained the age of superannuation had be survived and thereafter the dependent
pension shall be paid at 75 percent or 56.25 percent as the case may be, of the rates prescribed in sub rule (viii) above."

Inserted vide FD Memorandum No. F.15(2)FD(Rules)/99 dated 14.7.2000.

131
 “The Governor is pleased to order that the Special Pensionary Award sanctioned to
the family of Government servants under Chapter XXIII B of Rajasthan Service Rules prior
to 1.9.1988 may also be revised in accordance with the provisions contained in Finance
Department Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.”

112. Definition of emoluments

‘Emoluments’ will mean as defined in Rule 45 of Rajasthan Civil Service (Pension)
Rules, 1996.

113. Dearness Relief / Interim Relief

Dearness Relief and Interim Relief as may be admissible from time to time shall be
paid on the amount of family pension/dependent pension in accordance with the provisions
of rule 77 and 77A of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.

114. Procedure

(1) Except as provided in this rule in respect of matters of procedure, awards
under these rules are subject to procedure and rules relating to ordinary pensions to the
extent that such procedure and rules are not inconsistent with the rules contained in this
Chapter.

(2) The following authorities shall be competent to sanction pension under this
Chapter, to whom the application for grant of pension/gratuity in the form given in the
Annexure shall be submitted -

(i) Commandant, in case of RAC personnel:
ii) Superintendent of Police, in case of Police personnel other than R.A.C.;
i) Dy.|.G.P. in case of Police personnel of range offices;

iv) D.G.P. in case of Commandant or Superintendent of Police (other than
I.P.S.);

(v) Excise Commissioner, Rajasthan, in case of personnel of Preventive Branch,
of Excise Department.

The application shall be submitted through the Head of Office, under whom
the deceased Government servant was immediately serving before death.

(3) The pension sanctioning authority, on receipt of application shall immediately
fill up the prescribed form and issue orders for grant of pension/gratuity after necessary
enquiry and shall forward the sanction and application to the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan alongwith following documents:

(i) Last Pay Certificate.

(ii) Death Certificate by a Government Medical Officer provided that in cases
where the Police personnel are believed to be killed in encounter with dacoits
or while on duty, but could not be located, the Commandant/Superintendent
of Police/Director General of Police, as the case may be record the following
certificate in respect of such persons -

posted

(iii) Declaration for refund of excess amount of pension, in Form annexed.
(iv) A statement of circumstances resulting in death.

1. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No. F.15(2)FD(Rules)/99 dated 18.2.2002.

132
 (v) Left/right hand thumb and finger impressions of the claimant(s), in duplicate,
duly attested.

(vi) Specimen signature of the claimant(s), in duplicate, duly attested.

(vii) | Passport size photograph of the claimant(s), in duplicate, duly attested on the
face.

On receipt of the aforesaid documents, the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan, will issue the Pension Payment Order.

Guidelines for grant of special pensionary awards under Chapter VII of
Rajasthan Civil Service (Pension) Rules, 1996 to the Police and Excise (Preventive
Branch) employees.

Following guidelines are laid down for grant of special pensionary award :-

On occurence of an event leading to the death of a Government Servant while on
duty covered under this Chapter the officer under whose control the deceased Government
servant was performing duty shall intimate the facts of the event in detail to the head of
department/next higher authority immediately and not later than next working day. For
sanctioning such an award the death as a result of performance of duty/killed while on duty
should be beyond any doubt and dispute. In case of any doubt the authority competent to
sanction special pensionary award shall refer the matter to the next higher authority for
orders. In cases where the intimation regarding the death could not be given in the aforesaid
period, such cases shall invariably be referred to the Head of department/next higher
authority for seeking his orders. The pension sanctioning authority shall forward the claim to
the Director, Pension Department within a fortnight after the death of the employee who
after scrutiny of the claim shall issue P.P.O. within a period of 15 days.

For the purpose of grant of Death Gratuity the details of service duly verified
alongwith service book of the employee shall be sent to the Director, Pension in the form
prescribed for grant of family pension. The death under normal circumstances while on duty
shall not be covered for the purpose of grant of special pensionary awards.

The pension sanctioning authority shall personally be responsible to see that the
special pensionary award is sanctioned only to the categories of Government servants who
are on pensionable establishment whether temporary or permanent covered under rule 109
of the aforesaid rules.

133
 ANNEXURE

Application for a family pension for the family Of SHYWi ................... eee -.------०---०---०---
हि scmnscerewsererenianmimensenenee TWAS cccccinccerssniesaecoemeveenanve Department

=

Name of the Government Servant.
Designation.

Date of death.

- ७ N

Emoluments on the date of injury or death:
a
b

( Substantive Pay,
(
(c) Special Pay,
(
(

Offg. Pay, if any,

d) Personal Pay,
e) Allowances.

5. Particulars of the applicants for pension.

S.No. Name Relation with Date of Height Personal
the deceased birth marks

6. Name of Treasury/Sub-Treasury at which payment is desired.

7. Signature and left hand thumb and fingers’ impressions duly attested (to be
enclosed in duplicate.)

Note: - In case of females, right hand thumb and fingers’ impressions should be taken.
8. Full address of the applicant/applicants.

9. Required declaration attached.

Signature or Thumb impression of the applicant.

| certify that the information given above regarding Shri
injured/ dead and his dependents is correct as verified by me.

10. The following documents are enclosed :-

(i) | Last Pay Certificate giving details of the emoluments.

(ii) | Medical Report/Certificate of death.

iii) A statement of circumstances resulting in death.

iv) Left/Right hand thumb and finger impressions in duplicate, duly attested.

vi) Passport size photos in duplicate duly attested on the face.

(

(

(v) Specimen signatures in duplicate duly attested.

(

(vii) Declaration as required under Rule 114 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.

134
 11. Orders of pension sanctioning authority for special pensionary award. - The
undersigned having satisfied himself of the above particulars of late Shri/Shrimati ...............
hereby orders the grant of award of Family Pension and Gratuity which may be accepted by
the Director, Pension Department, as admissible under the rules. The grant of Family
Pension and/or Gratuity shall commence from ........................----

Pension Sanctioning Authority
(with seal of office)

Declaration

"WVETSSS HAG sc csincssncsnaveieuneuansiunenenemccsatacns (here state the designation of the officer
sanctioning the pension/family pension/service gratuity/death-cum-retirement gratuity/
arrears of pension or gratuity) has consented to grant me/us the sum of Re. .......... as the
amount of my pension/family pension and/or the sum of Rs. ............... as the amount of
gratuity’ death-cum-retirement gratuity) arrears of pension or gratuity due to
Shri/Shrimatt ...................... cece eee eeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeees (here give the name and designation of the
Government servant) I/We hereby acknowledge that in accepting this amount, I/We fully
understand that the pension/ family pension/gratuity/ death-cum-retirement gratuity/arrears
of pension or gratuity/due to Shri/Shrimat .....................--.------ ७ ------- ">> is subject to
revision on its being found to be in excess of that to which I/We am/are entitled under the
rules and I/We promise to base no objection to such revision. I/We further promise to repay
any amount advanced to me/us in excess of that to which I/We may be eventually found
entitled”.

KR RK KR K

135
 CHAPTER VIII

EXTRAORDINARY PENSIONS

115. Extent of application

The rules in this Chapter shall apply to all persons appointed by the Government of
Rajasthan to services and posts under its administrative control or in connection with the af-
fairs of Rajasthan, other than those to whom the Workmen’s compensation Act applies,
whether the appointment of such persons is permanent or temporary, on a time scale of pay
or fixed pay, or piece work rates.

NOTES

1. Article 320 of the Constitution of India provides that the Public Service
Commission should be consulted on claims for the award of injury pensions and as to the
amounts of such awards. It is, therefore, necessary to consult the Commission on every
claim by or in respect of a person, who is or was under the rule making control of the
Rajasthan Government for the award of a pension or gratuity under the rules 115 to 122 and
127 of Chapter VIII. The following supplementary instructions should be observed when the
Rajasthan Public Service Commission is consulted in respect of claims for the award of
injury pension:-

(i) | the Commission should be consulted after the department concerned and audit
have expressed their views on a case. For procedure see Rule 127;

(ii) the point of reference to the Commission should inter alia be, whether in their
opinion the award of any pension, gratuity, etc. is admissible, and if so, the
amount thereof;

(iii) any such reference to the Commission should be in the form of an official letter
with which the relevant papers should be forwarded.

2. Notwithstanding anything contained in Note 1, it shall not be necessary for the
Commission to be consulted on any claim for the award of a family pension on account of
death caused as a result of injuries sustained by a person while serving in the Police Force
of the Government in a civil capacity and as to the amount of any such Award.

116. Definition

For the purpose of the Rules contained in this Chapter unless there is anything
repugnant in the subject or context,

(1) “accident” means -

(i) | asudden and unavoidable mishap, or
(ii) a mishap due to an act of devotion to duty in an emergency arising
otherwise than by violence out of and in the course of service.
(2) “date of injury” means-

(i) in the case of violence or injury the actual date on which the injury is
suffered or such date not later than the date of the report of the Medical
Board, as the Government may fix; and

(ii) in the case of disease, the date on which the Medical Board reports or
such earlier date as may be fixed by Government with due regard to
opinion of the Medical Board;

136
 (3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

“injury” means-

an injury as is mentioned in Schedule | hereto annexed. Permanent Total
Disablement shall be deemed to result from every injury specified in Part | of
Schedule | or from any combination of injuries specified in Part Il of that
Schedule where the aggregate percentage of loss of earning capacity
(percentage of disability) amounts to cent per cent or more. Every injury
specified in Part Il of Schedule | shall be made to result in Permanent Partial
Disablement.

“disease” means -
a disease as is mentioned in Schedule I-A hereto annexed.
“Pay” means-

the pay as defined in Rule 7 (24) of the Rajasthan Service Rules, which a
person was drawing on the date of his death or injury:

Provided that in the case of a person remunerated by piece work rates, pay
means the average earnings of the last six months ending with the date of his
death or injury;

“violence” means-

the act of a person who inflicts an injury on a Government servant -

(i) | by assaulting or resisting him in the discharge of his duties, or in order to
deter or prevent him from performing his duties, or

(ii) | because of anything done or attempted to be done by such Government
servant or by any other public servant in the lawful discharge of his duty
as such, or

(iii) because of his official position.

117. Condition for accepting disablement/death due to Government service

(1)

(2)

(a) Disablement shall be accepted as due to Government service provided
that it is certified that it is due to wound, injury or disease which-
(i) is attributable to Government service, or
(ii) existed before or arose during Government service and has been and
remains aggravated thereby.

(b) Death shall be accepted as due to Government service provided it is
certified that it was due to or hastened by-

(i) a wound, injury or disease which was attributable to Government
service, or
(ii) the aggravation by Government service of a wound, injury or disease
which existed before or arose during Government service.
There shall be a causal connection between-

(a) disablement and Government service, and
(b) death and Government service,

for attributability or aggravation to be conceded. Guidelines in this regard are given in
the Appendix which shall be treated as part and parcel of these Rules.

137
 Clarification - It will be seen from the Forms ‘C’, ‘D’ and ‘E’ that these forms of
medical certificates have been so designed that they would indicate whether the entitlement
criteria laid down in Rule 117 have been satisfied or not, and therefore, normally, no other
separate certificates in that behalf may be necessary. It is essential for the sanctioning
authority as well as the Director, Pension Department, to satisfy themselves that the
death/disability is, in fact, attributable to or aggravated by the Government service which
alone makes an E.O.P. Award admissible and for that purpose, it is essential for both of
these authorities to satisfy themselves in that behalf and certify the nexus and causal
connection between disablement and Government service or between death and
Government service (as the case may be), in any particular case, as laid down in the
Rule 117 on the basis of the medical and other documents regarding the case. If a
Government servant had died in such circumstances and that a medical report could not be
secured, even then, the nexus and the causal connection between death and Government
service has to be established before conceding acceptance of death due to Government
service.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the degree of default or
contributory negligence on the part of a Government servant may be taken into
consideration in making an award under these rules in favour of such Government servant,
but, shall not be taken into account where such award is made in favour of the family of
such Government servant.

118. Conditions of Award

No award shall be made under these Rules except with the sanction of the
Government or of a competent authority to whom Government may delegate, subject to
such conditions as it may fix, the powers vested in Government under these Rules.

119. Effect of award on other pensionary benefits

Except as otherwise provided in these rules, an award under these rules shall not
affect any other pension or gratuity for which the Government servant concerned may be
eligible under any other rules for the time being in force; and the pension granted under the
provisions of these rules shall not be taken into account in fixing the pay of the pensioner on
his continued employment or re-employment in Government service. In case of death of the
Government servant due to Government service, the family shall be paid Death Gratuity as
per rule 55 of these Rules. Family pension under Chapter V C of these rules shall not be
payable in addition to the Award.

Note:- See Government of Rajasthan’s Decision No.1 below rule 127 (3).

120. Award when inadmissible
No award shall be made in respect of -
(i) | aninjury sustained more than five years before the date of application, or

(ii) | death which occurred more than seven years -
(a) after the injury due to violence or accident was sustained, or

(b) after the Government servant was medically reported as unfit for duty on
account of the disease of which he died.

Note:- See Rule 131 regarding date of payment of E.O.P.

138
 121. Determination of percentage of disability

(1) The percentage of disability due to an injury or injuries shall be as specified in
SCHEDULE | hereto annexed, or failing that, as certified by the Medical Authority.

(2) The percentage of disability due to a disease or diseases specified in
SCHEDULE I-A, hereto annexed, shall be as certified by the Medical Authority.

122. Amount of Disability Pension Award

(1) When disablement of a Government servant is conceded as due to Government
service in terms of Rule 117, he shall be awarded disability pension in terms of sub-rule (2)
or (3) or lump sum compensation in terms of sub-rule (4) of this Rule in accordance with the
percentage of disability (suffered by him) as certified by the Medical Authority concerned.

(2) If the Government servant is boarded out of Government service on account of
his disablement, the quantum of disability pension for cent per cent disability shall be as
specified in SCHEDULE II hereto annexed. The quantum of disability pension for lower
percentage of disability shall be, “proportionately lower”. (The minima and the maxima given
in SCHEDULE II are applicable only for arriving at the monthly disability pension for cent per
cent disability and are not applicable in respect of percentage of disability lower than cent
per cent).

(3) If the Government servant is boarded out of Government service on account of
such disablement, and further if, the percentage of his permanent disability as certified by
the Medical Authority is not less than 60% his monthly disability pension shall be related to
the family pension admissible to the widow (in case he had died instead of being disabled)
in the manner indicated below -

(a) If the employee held a permanent pensionable post and is invalided/boarded
out from service, as a result of disability attributable to service, after rendering
ten years service, he shall be given, apart from the normal invalid pension
under the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, the amount of disability pension as
is admissible under this Chapter subject to the condition that the sum-total of
the invalid pension plus the disability pension shall not be less than the
widow's (family) pension under this Chapter; and

(b) If the employee eligible for disability pension under these Rules is
invalided/boarded out from service before putting in ten years service, he
does not get any invalid pension but gets only service gratuity under the
R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996. Apart from such gratuity, he shall be given
such amount of disability pension as is admissible under these Rules subject
to the condition that the sum-total of the pension equivalent of such gratuity
under the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996 plus the disability pension as is
admissible under these Rules, shall not be less than the widow's (family)
pension under these Rules.

(4) If the Government servant is retained in service in spite of such disablement, he
shall be paid a compensation in lump sum (in lieu of the disability pension) on the basis of
disability pension admissible to him in accordance with the provision of sub-rule (2) of this
Rule, by arriving at the capitalized value of such disability pension with reference to the
Commutation Table, in force from time to time.

123. Amount of Award (EOP) to Family

When death of a Government servant is conceded as due to Government service in
terms of Rule 117, his widow and children shall be awarded pensionary benefits in
accordance with SCHEDULE III hereto annexed.

139
 Note - If a Government servant dies leaving behind two or more widows, the
pension admissible, under this rule to the widow shall be divided equally
among all the widows.

124. Award to other members of the deceased’s family

(1) If the deceased Government servant has left neither a widow nor a child, an
award may be made to his father and his mother individually, or jointly and in the absence of
the father and the mother, to minor brothers and sisters, individually or collectively, if they
were largely dependent on the Government servant for support and are in pecuniary need:

Provided that the total amount of the awards shall not exceed one-half of the pension
that would have been admissible to the widow who is childless under Rule 123.

(2) Any award made under sub-rule (1) of this rule will, in the event of an
improvement in the pecuniary circumstances of the pensioner be subject to review in such
manner as the Government may by order prescribe.

Note:- If any of the widows, children, father, mother or minor brothers or sisters is
denied any share in the property of the Government servant under a will or
deed made by him such a person shall be ineligible to receive any award
under these rules and the benefit will pass on to the next person eligible.

125. Date from which award to the family effective

(1) A family pension will take effect from the day following the death of the
Government servant or from such other date as the Government may decide.

(2) A family pension will ordinarily be tenable

(i) | in the case of a widow or mother until death or remarriage whichever occurs
earlier;

(ii) in the case of son until he attains the age of 25 years or minor brother until he
attains the age of 18;

(iii) in the case of an unmarried daughter until marriage or until she attains the age
of 25, whichever occurs earlier; or in case of minor sister until marriage or until
she attains the age of 21, whichever occurs earlier;

(iv) in the case of a father, for life.

126. Continuance of award to widow on remarriage with her deceased husband’s
brother

Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (i) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 125, a
widow of an employee who re-marries her deceased husband’s brother and continues to live
a communal life with, or contributes to the support of the other dependents of the deceased
shall not be disqualified for the grant of extraordinary pension, otherwise admissible to her
under these rules.

127. Procedure

(1) In respect of matters of procedure, all awards under these rules are subject to
any procedure rules relating to ordinary pensions for the time being in force, to the extent
that such procedure rules are applicable and are not inconsistent with these rules.

(2) When a claim for any injury pension or gratuity or family pension arises, the Head
of Office or of the Department in which the injured or deceased Government servant was
employed will forward the claim through the usual channel to the Government with the
following documents:-

140
 (i) full statement of circumstances in which the injury was received, the disease
was contracted or the death occurred.

(ii) The application for injury pension or gratuity in Form A or as the case may
be, the application for family pension in Form B of the Forms set forth in
Schedule IV.

(iii) In the case of an injured Government servant or one who has contracted a
disease a medical report in Form C of the Forms set forth in Schedule IV. In
the case of a deceased Government servant a medical report as to the death
or reliable evidence as to the actual occurrence of death if the Government
servant lost his life in such circumstances that a medical report cannot be
secured.

(iv) A report of the Director, Pension Department concerned as to whether an
award is admissible under the rules and if so of what amount.

(3) Where the Government are satisfied on the evidence placed before them by a
Government servant in respect of whom a medical report for the purpose of grant of wound
or other extraordinary pension has been received by them, of the possibility of an error of
judgment in the decision of the Medical Board which examined him, the Government may
direct a second Medical Board consisting of members other than those who constituted the
first Medical Board to examine the Government servant and submit a report to the
Government in the matter; pension shall be granted to the Government servant in
accordance with the decision of the Second Medical Board.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

1. Authority competent to sanction the award

Where there is no disagreement between the Director, Pension Department, the
Administrative Department and the Rajasthan Public Service Commission, either as regards
admissibility of the award or the amount admissible, the pension should be sanctioned by
the: -

(i) Administrative departments of the Government; and

(ii) the Chairman Board of Revenue, Director General (Police), Director General
(Prisons) and Director, Medical and Health Services in respect of Govern-
ment servants carrying pay in pay scales where the maximum does not
exceeds "Rs. 8000";

in respect of Government servant working under them.

Cases which are not clearly covered by the rules or where there is disagreement
between the Director, Pension Department and the Administrative Department or between
them and the Rajasthan Public Service Commission or where an award not clearly
admissible under the rules, is proposed to be granted on ex-gratia grounds, should,
however, continue to be referred to Finance Department for concurrence as usual.

The pension sanctioning authorities should make a direct reference in all the cases
of awards under the Extraordinary Pension rules in which the proposed pension or gratuity
is held to be clearly covered by and is admissible under the rules to the Rajasthan Public
Service Commission.

1. The existing words & figures "Rs.2600" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996

141
 2. Award only under E.O.P. Rules in cases covered under both the Pension Rules

Family Pension to the families of Government servants governed by the Family
Pension Rules under Chapter V C of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996 as well as the E.O.P.
Rules whose death is accepted as due to Government service as defined in the latter rules,
would be paid under the Extraordinary Pension Rules and not under Family Pension Rules.
In other words, they will not be entitled to benefits under the Family Pension Rules in
addition.

3. Lump sum payment of capitalized value of injury pension in cases of re-
employment

In cases where injury pension is admissible under the E.O.P. Rules and the
employee continues in service and draws salary, he should be paid a lump sum
compensation of an amount equal to the capitalized value of the injury pension in lieu of the
injury pension. The capitalized value of the injury pension would in such cases be
determined with reference to the Commutation Table in force on the date from which injury
pension becomes admissible. However, when the injury results in invalidment and boarding
out of the employee from service, the existing practice of payment of a monthly injury
pension shall continue.

4. Ex gratia payment to families of Government servants travelling by service
aircraft and dying in accidents

If a Government servant while travelling on duty in a Government aircraft or while
undertaking air journeys on duty by non-schedule flight in Charted plane dies as a result of
accident to the aircraft, his family will be entitled to the grant of ex-gratia payment of Rs. Five
lakhs in addition to the benefits admissible under Extraordinary Pension Rules in
Chapter VII.

Note - The term ‘family’ for the purpose of the aforesaid Government of Rajasthan’s
Decision No.4, shall include wife, children and failing that, other legal heirs including parents
of the deceased Government servant.

5. Appeal against the findings of a Medical Board who examined a Government
servant for the purpose of grant of wound or other extraordinary pensions

The following procedure may be followed in this regard:-

(i) The findings of the examining Medical Board should be made known to the
Government servant concerned as soon as possible after the receipt of the
medical report by the Head of the Office/Department. The Government
servant concerned should, if he desires to appeal against such decisions, do
so together with requisite evidence in support of his case within one month
from the date on which the findings of the Medical Board were made known
to him. Ordinarily there is no right of appeal from the findings of an examining
medical authority but if Government are satisfied on the evidence placed
before them by the Government servant concerned, of the possibility of an
error of judgment in the decision of the examining medical authority, it will be
open to them to allow re-examination by a second Medical Board.

(ii) If any medical certificate is produced by the Government servant as a piece
of evidence about the possibility of an error of judgment in the decision of an
examining medical authority who had examined him in the first instance, the
certificate will not be taken into consideration unless it contains a note by the
medical practitioner who gave the certificate to the effect that it has been
given in full knowledge of the fact that the person concerned has already

142
 (iii)

(iv)

been examined by a Medical Board who have given their opinion as to the
injury/disease in respect of which the Government servant had applied for
extraordinary pension.

The expenditure incurred in assembling the Review Board shall be borne by
the Government, provided that the Government servant shall be required to
pay a prescribed fee, which shall be refunded if his appeal is upheld by the
Review Board.

To ensure uniformity of procedure, all appeals shall at first be referred to the
Medical & Health Department in the Secretariat who shall advise on the
evidence produced as to whether there is an error of judgment on the part of
the examining Medical Board who first conducted the Medical examination
and whether the appeal should be accepted or not and if accepted, by whom
such re-examination should be conducted.

143
 GUIDELINES FOR CONCEDING ATTRIBUTABILITY OF
DISABLEMENT OR DEATH TO GOVERNMENT SERVICE

[Ref. Rule 117 (2)]

1. Rule 117 covers also cases of death after discharge/invaliding from service.

2. In deciding on the issue of entitlement, all the evidence (both direct and
circumstantial) will be taken into account and the benefit of reasonable doubt will be given to
the claimant. This benefit will be given more liberally to the claimant in field service cases.

3. Post-discharge claims - Cases in which a disease did not actually lead to the
Government servant’s discharge from service but arose within 7 years thereafter may be
recognised as attributable to service, if it can be established medically that the disability is a
delayed manifestation of a pathologic process set in motion by service conditions obtaining
prior to discharge and that if the disability had been manifest at the time of discharge, the
individual would have been invalided out of service on this account. In cases where an
individual in receipt of a disability pension dies at home, and it cannot, from a strictly medical
point of view, be definitely established that the death was solely due to the disablement in
respect of which the disability pension was granted-

(a) the benefit of doubt in determining attributability, should go to the family of the
deceased, if death occurs within 7 years from the date of his invalidment from
service, unless there are other factors adversely affecting the claim; and

(b) if death takes place more than 7 years after the date of the man’s invalidment
from service, the benefit of doubt will go to the State.

In cases where an individual outlives a normal span of life, i.e., where death takes
place at the age of 60 or above, the death should be held to be due to normal causes and
not to Government service.

Note:- Death of a disability pensioner, whose disablement has been accepted on the basis
of aggravation, may also be accepted as due to Government service under Rule 117
(1) (b) if the last assessment of disablement was 50 per cent, or above. If the last
accepted assessment of disablement was less than 50 per cent, death should not be
regarded as due to service.

The above procedure will apply when death is established as due to the disability in
respect of which disability pension was_ granted. If this is not the case, the identification of
the cause of death with the invaliding disability will first be determined in accordance with
the provisions of the Guidelines. If the identity can be conceded thereunder, the procedure
in the preceding sub-paragraph will be followed for determining the further point whether
entitlement to extraordinary family pension can be conceded in a case where an invaliding
disability was aggravated by service.

4. (a) (i) Injuries sustained when the man is ‘on duty’ will be deemed to have arisen
in, or resulted from, Government service; but in cases of injuries due to
serious negligence or misconduct, the question of reducing the disability
pension will be considered.

(ii) In cases of self-inflicted injuries while on duty, attributability will not be
conceded unless it is established that service factors were responsible for
such action; in cases where attributability is conceded, the question of
grant of disability pension at full or at a reduced rate will be considered.

(b) A person subject to the disciplinary code of the Rajasthan Armed
Constabulary Battalion is ‘on duty’-

(i) | When performing an official task or a task, failure to do which would
constitute an offence, triable under the disciplinary code, applicable
to him.

144
 (ii) When moving from one place of duty to another place of duty
irrespective of the method of movement.

(iii) During the period of participation in recreation, organised or
permitted by service authorities, and during the period of travelling
in a body or singly under organised arrangements.

(iv) When proceeding from his duty station to his leave station on
returning to duty from his leave station at public expenses, that is,
on railway warrant, on cash TA (irrespective of whether railway
warrant/cash TA is admitted for the whole journey or for a portion
only), in Government transport or when road mileage is paid for the
journey.

(v) When journeying by a reasonable route from one’s quarter to and
back from the appointed place of duty under organised
arrangements or by private conveyance when a person is entitled to
use of service transport but that transport is not available.

(c) An accident which occurs when a man is not strictly ‘on duty’ as defined

above, may also be attributable to service, provided that it involved risk
which was definitely enhanced in kind or degree by the nature, conditions,
obligations or incidents of his service and that the same was not a risk
common to human existence in modern conditions in India. Thus, for
example, where a person is killed or injured by someone by reason of his
belonging to an Armed Police Battalion (and in the course of his duty in
such service, he had incurred wrath of such person) he shall be deemed
to be ‘on duty’ at the relevant time.

This benefit will be given more liberally to the claimant in cases occurring on ‘active
service’ as defined in the relevant Acts/Rules (e.g., those applicable to RAC Personnel).

5. In respect of diseases, the following rules will be observed:-

(a)

(b)

(०

(५)

Cases, in which it is established that conditions of Government service did not
determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the
subsequent course of the disease, will fall for acceptance on the basis of
aggravation.

A disease which has led to an individual’s discharge or death will ordinarily be
deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the
individual’s acceptance for Government service. However, if medical opinion
holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected
on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be
deemed to have arisen during service.

If a disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established
that the conditions of Government service determined or contributed to the
onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances on
duty in Government service.

In considering whether a particular disease is due to Government service, it is
necessary to relate the established facts, in the aetiology of the disease and of
its normal development, to the effect that conditions of service, e.g., exposure,
stress, climate, etc., may have had on its manifestation. Regard must also be
had to the time factor (Also see Schedule I-A).

145
 (i) | Common diseases known to be affected by exposure to weather

Diseases such as Bronchitis, Rheumatism and Nephritis-indeed most diseases of the
respiratory system, joints and kidneys-are affected by climatic conditions. The period and
the conditions of service at any particular place should be taken into account in determining
causal connection with service.

(ii) Common disease known to be affected by stress and strain

This should be decided with due reference to the nature of the duties which the
individual has had to perform in Government service. It may be that in some cases the
individual had been engaged on sedentary duties, when they will normally not qualify.

(iii) Diseases endemic to certain areas

Disease such as Malaria, Kalazar, Filariasis, Dysentery, Cholera, etc., are endemic
in certain areas. These disease may also be introduced by movements of infected persons.

In determining causal connection with service, it will have to be established that the
conditions of Government service exposed the individual to the infections as a result of
which he contracted the disease. Where there is medical evidence of the contraction of the
disease either prior to entry into service, or while off duty or on leave or desertion or
unauthorised absence, etc., attributability should not be accepted, unless the disease occurs
within the incubation period.

(iv) Diseases due to infections in service

Entitlement to pension will be admitted if the exposure to infection arose from the
circumstances of the member’s Government service.

(v) Diseases known to be affected by dietary compulsions

The compulsions of service would also cover such cases as gastric disorders, e.g.,
gastritis, gastric and duodenal ulcers, where it is established that the member was unable to
follow a dietary regime required for his condition. The effect of service in such cases will be
limited essentially to the question of aggravation of a pre-existing constitutional condition.
This will not normally apply to individuals in sedentary occupation.

(vi) Diseases which run their course independently of external
circumstances

There are certain diseases which would have run the same course whether the
individual had been in Government service or not, e.g., Leukaemia, Hodgkin’s disease, etc.
(See Part Il of Schedule I-A). Such cases will not be accepted as aggravated by service
unless it is clear that owing to exigencies of service, the man did not receive treatment of a
satisfactory character and standard or such treatment was so delayed, as to be less effec-
tive than it should have been.

(vii) Venereal Disease

(1) Venereal disease will normally be rejected but a sequela of the disease may
sometimes to accepted as aggravated by service. In the case of such disease contracted
during service, grounds for acceptance will rarely be found unless the member after
treatment had returned to full duty had been subjected to such strain as would produce one
of the after effects of the disease sooner than would have normally been the case. The
strain must have been of an exceptional nature.

(2) In the case of disease contracted before service if the member had reached an
age when such a manifestation could be accepted, entitlement will not be conceded. On the
other hand, if the later manifestation had been produced or hastened by the strain of service
in which case there should be evidence that the strain was of an exceptional nature,
entitlement may be considered on the basis of aggravation.

146
 (3) In the case of disease due to heredity, entitlement must be determined as in Para

(2) above.

(4) The above refers only to late manifestations or sequela of venereal disease as
Neuro Syphilis or Cardio-vascular Syphilis.

(viii) Invalidation on account of indulgence in drugs or drinks

Entitlement shall not be conceded if the disability or death on which the claim is
based, resulted from indulgence in drugs or drinks which was within one’s own control.

6. Unforeseen effects of service medical treatment-

(a)

(b)

Whether unforeseen complications arise as a result of treatment
(including operative treatment) given for the purpose of rendering a
member fit for service duties, any disablement resulting will normally
be accepted as attributable to service.

Where the treatment is given for other reasons, the position regarding
any unforeseen complications differs according as the conditions
which necessitated treatment was or was not, either attributable to or
aggravated by service. If it was so attributable or aggravated any
disablement resulting from the treatment it will normally be accepted
as attributable to service. If it was not, no responsibility will be
accepted for the additional disablement unless neglect, delay, faulty
technique or lack of reasonable skill can be held responsible for the
untoward outcome, or the exigencies of service before, during or after
the treatment can be held to have caused or aggravated the condition.

The above considerations apply whether the treatment is given in a
service hospital or under service arrangements in any other hospital
but will not apply if the treatment is undertaken under private
arrangement by an individual.

7. Assessment-

(a)

(b)

The assessment of a disability is the estimate of the degree of
disablement it causes, which can properly be ascribed to service as
defined below.

The disablement properly referable to service will be assessed as
under-

(i) At the time of discharge from the Government service™*.-

Normally the whole of the disablement then caused by the disability.
This rule will apply irrespective of whether the disability is actually at-
tributable to service, or is merely aggravated thereby. In the latter
event, part of the disablement on discharge may have been present
before service and/or may have been brought about by the natural
progress of the disability during service. But as it is impossible, for so
long as the strain and stress of service continues, to apportion
quantitatively the effects of service and non-service factors, the entire
disablement at the time of discharge will be taken into account. For
example:

(1) Where a person who had a partially disabled hand, sustains
an injury to the same hand which renders it less useful than
before, or person with an impaired foot injures the other as a
result of service, thus increasing his defect in locomotion; or

* Special consideration should be given to cases in which the disablement has been or may have been worsened by
the improper or excessive use of alcohol, tobacco, or drugs or by veneral disease. In such cases, the effects of these
will be excluded in assessing disablement ascribable to service.

147
 (d)

(2) Where a person gives history of cough and cold prior to
enrolment and is invalided out of service for Chronic Bron-
chitis held to be aggravated by service, pension will be admis-
sible for the total disablement.

(ii) On re-survey of disability after discharge from the service.-

The whole of the disablement then caused by the disability, less the
following:-

(1) The part due to non-service factors, such as individual habits,
occupation in civil life, accident after discharge, climatic
environment after discharge;

(2) Any worsening due to the natural progress of the disability
since discharge apart from the effects of service.

Deduction (1) will be made in all cases; while deduction (2)
above will apply only in cases where the disability is accepted
as aggravated by, but not attributable to, service.

In cases accepted as aggravated by service, although a percentage of
disablement, equal to more than 20 per cent, may be assessed on
medical re-survey, after discharge from service, in accordance with
para (b) (ii) (2) above, disability pension will cease to be payable as
soon as the effects of the aggravation by service have passed away,
e.g., where a person with disease, e.g., Fibrositis, Bronchitis, Eczema,
etc., held to be aggravated by service, is invalided out and on re-
survey was found by the Medical Board to have been restored (a) to
his pre-service condition or (b) the condition in which he may have
been normally at that time even if he had not joined Government
service, aggravation by service will be deemed to have passed away.

Paired organs-

(i) Paired organs, namely, eyes, ears, arms and legs shall be
considered together, where disablement due to service occurs
in one of a pair of organs, assessment on discharge will be
made with reference to the diminution of the functional
capacity of the organs working together. Therefore,
assessment will include functional defect of the pair of organs.

(ii) Subject to the exceptions specified below, any subsequent
increase in the non-service disablement and non-service
disablement arising after discharge whether due to injury or
disease will be excluded from the assessment.

(iii) Cases arise in which at the time of discharge, there is damage
by service to one only of the paired organs (namely, eyes,
ears, arms including hands) and legs (including feet) and the
other is, either normal or impaired in a minor degree. Where
the disablement acceptable under clause (ii) above and the
disablement of the other limb or organ are together assessable
at any subsequent date at 100% the assessment for pension
purposes will be increased by one half of the difference
between the current assessment and 100 per cent. For
instance, a pensioner receiving an award at the 40% rate of
the loss of an eye who later loses the sight of his other eye
through a non-service cause, will have his award increased to
70% rate; and a pensioner with an award at 80% for a gunshot

148
 (e)

(9)

wound of an arm, who later develops severe arthritis of his
other arm, thereby being 100% disabled, will qualify for a
revised award at 90% rate. Where the combined disablement
of the pair of organs is less than 100%, but is more than twice
as serious as the disablement acceptable under clause (ii)
above, the assessment will be increased to one half of the
combined disablement. If, for example, a pensioner with an
award at 30% rate for the loss of vision of one eye partially
loses the sight of the other eye through a non-service cause,
and the defective vision of both eyes together is assessable at
80%, his award will be increased to the 40% rate.

(iv) The provisions of the preceding sub-clause are applicable
even where the second of a pair of organs has been disabled
by some generalised disability (e.g., rheumated arthritis) which
would have also disabled the first of the pair if it had not been
lost or damaged as the result of service.

Composite assessments -

Where there are two or more disabilities due to service, compensation
will be based on the composite assessment of the degree of
disablement. Generally speaking, when separate disabilities have
entirely different functional effects, the composite assessment will be
the arithmetical sum of their separate assessments. But where the
functional effects of the disabilities overlap, the composite
assessment will be reduced in proportion to the degree of
overlapping.

Nil disablement -

Where, although a definite disability is or has been in evidence, the
Medical Board consider that any disablement resulting therefor has
ceased or has become so small as not to admit of assessable
compensation, the assessment will be expressed ‘nil disablement’.
Where the disability due to service has no connection with pre-
existing disability, as for example, a person who had lost a finger prior
to enlistment, loses a great toe by service, compensation will be
restricted to the loss of the great toe only.

KKK KEK

149
 [Se

SCHEDULE |
e Rule 116 (3)]

Sr.
No.

Description of Injury

PART |

List of Injuries deemed to result in
Permanent Total Disablement
Loss of both hands or amputation at higher sites
Loss of a hand and a foot
Double amputation through leg or thigh, or amputation through

leg or thigh on one side and loss of other foot

Loss of sight to such an extent as to render the claimant unable to

perform any work for which eyesight is essential

5. Very severe facial disfigurement

6. Absolute deafness

PART Il

List of Injuries deemed to result in
Partial Disablement

AMPUTATION CASES - UPPER LIMBS
(either arm)

1. Amputation through shoulder joint

SEP ONG

0.

Amputation below shoulder with stump less
than 8" from tip of acromion

Amputation from 8" from tip of acromion

to less than 4 1/2" below tip of olecranon

Loss of a hand or of the thumb and four fingers of one hand or
amputation from 4 1/2" below tip of olecranon
Loss of thumb

Loss of thumb and its metacarpal bone

Loss of four fingers of one hand

Loss of three fingers of one hand

Loss of two fingers of one hand

Loss of terminal phalanx of thumb

150

Percentage
of loss of
earning
capacity

100
100

100

100
100
100

90

80

70

60
30
40
50
30
20
20
 Sr. Description of Injury Percentage
No. of loss of
earning
capacity
AMPUTATION CASES - LOWER LIMBS
11. Amputation of both feet resulting in end-bearing stumps 90
12. Amputation through both feet proximal to
the metatarse-phalangeal joint 80
13. Loss of all toes of both feet through the
metatarso-phalangeal joint 40
14. Loss of all toes of both feet proximal to
the proximal interphalangeal joint 30
15. Loss of all toes of both feet distal to the
proximal interphalangeal joint 20
16. Amputation at hip 90
17. Amputation below hip with stump not exceeding 5" in length
measured from tip of great trenchanter 80
18. Amputation below hip with stump exceeding
5" in length measured from tip of great
trenchanter but not beyond middle thigh 70
19. Amputation below middle thigh to 34" below knee 60
20. Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 374" but
not exceeding 5" 50
21. Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 5" 40
22. Amputation of one foot resulting in end-bearing 30
23. Amputation through one foot proximal to
the metatarse-phalangeal joint 30
24. Loss of all toes of one foot through the metatarse-phalangeal joint 20
OTHER INJURIES
25. Loss of one eye, without complications,
the other being normal 40
26. Loss of vision of one eye, without complications, or disfigurement
of eye ball, the other being normal 30

151
 51. Description of Injury Percentage

No. of loss of
earning
capacity

LOSS OF -

A. FINGERS OF RIGHT OR LEFT HAND

Index Finger

27. Whole 14

28. Two phalanges 11

29. One phalanx 9

30. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 5
Middle Finger

31. Whole 12

32. Two phalanges 9

33. One phalanx

34. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone

Ring or Little Finger

35. Whole 7
36. Two phalanges 6
37. One phalanx 5
38. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 2
B. TOES OF RIGHT OR LEFT FOOT
Great Toe
39. Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 14
40. Part, with some loss of bone 3
Any other Toe
41. Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 3
42. Part, with some loss of bone 1

152

 51. Description of Injury Percentage
No. of loss of
earning
capacity

TWO TOES OF ONE FOOT,
EXCLUDING GREAT TOE

43. Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 5

44. Part, with some loss of bone 2

THREE TOES OF ONE FOOT,
EXCLUDING GREAT TOE

45. Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 6

46. Part, with some loss of bone 3

FOUR TOES OF ONE FOOT,
EXCLUDING GREAT TOE

47 Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 9

48 Part, with some loss of bone 3

KR RK KEK

NOTE- Complete and permanent loss of the use of any limb or member referred to in
this Schedule shall be deemed to be the equivalent of the loss of that limb or
member.

153
 SCHEDULE I-A

[See Rule 116 (4)]

LIST AND CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES WHICH CAN BE CONTRACTED BY
SERVICE

Diseases affected by climatic conditions

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)
(xiii)
(xiv)
(xv)

(xvi)

Pulmonary Tuberculosis.

Pulmonary Oedema.

Pulmonary Tuberculosis with pleural effusion.
Tuberculosis - Non-pulmonary.

Bronchitis.

Pleurisy, empyema, lung abscess and bronchiectasis.
Lobar pneumonia.

Nephritis (acute and chronic).

Otitis Media.

Rheumatism-acute.

Rheumatism-chronic.

Arthritis.

Myalgia.

Lumbago.

Frost-bite leading to amputation of limb/limbs.
Heat Stroke.

Diseases affected by stress and strain

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)

Psychosis and Psychoneurosis.

Hyperpiesta.

Hypertension (B.P.)

Pulmonary Tuberculosis.

Pulmonary Tuberculosis with pleural effusion.
Tuberculosis-Non-pulmonary.

Mitral Stenosis.

Pericarditis and adherent pericardium.
Endo-carditis.

Sub-acute bacterialendo-carditis, including infective endocarditis.
Nyocarditis-acute or chronic.

Valvular disease.

154
 Diseases affected by dietary compulsions

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)

(viii)

Infective hepatitis (Jaundice).

Diseases of stomach and deodenum.

Worm infestations particularly Guinea worm and round worm infections.
Gastritis.

Food poisoning, specially due to tinned food.

Gastric ulcer.

Duodenal ulcer.

Nutritional Disorders.

Diseases affected by training, marching, etc.

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(४)
(४)
(vii)

(viii)

Tetanus, erysipelas, septicaemia and pyaemia, etc., resulting from injuries.
Varicose veins.

Ankylosis and acquired deformities resulting from injuries.

Hernia.

Post-traumatic epilepsy and other mental changes resulting from skull injury.
Internal derangement of knee joint.

Burns sustained through petrol fire, kerosene oil, etc., leading to scars and
various deformities and disabilities.

Deformities of feet.

Environmental Diseases

(i)

(ii)

Diseases contracted in the course of official duty of attending to a veneral or
septicaemic patient or conducting a post-mortem examination.
Diseases contracted on account of handling poisonous chemicals and

radiation equipment.

DISEASES NOT NORMALLY AFFECTED BY SERVICE

(i)
(ii)

(iii)
(iv)
(v)

(vi)
(vii)

Malignant disease: Cancer and Carcinoma.

Sarcoma (except in cases of sarcoma of bone with a history of injury, due to
service, on the site of development of the growth)

Epithelioma.

Rodent ulcer.

Lymphosarcoma.

Lymphadenoma (Hodgkin's disease).

Leukaemia.

155
 EYES

(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)

(xiii)
(xiv)
(xv)
(xvi)

(xvii)

Pernicious anaemia (Addison’s anaemia).
Ostoitis deformana (Paget’s disease).
Gout.

Acromegaly.

Corrhosis of the liver-if alcoholic.

Errors of refraction.

Hypermetropia.

Myopia.

Astigmatism.

Preshyopia Glaucoma-acute or chronic, unless there is a history of injury due

to service or of disease of the eye due to service.

156
 SCHEDULE II

[See Rule 122 (2)]

DISABILITY PENSION

Disability Pension:

1.

Disability Pension for 100% disability shall be allowed at the following rates: -

Pay per month Rate of disability pension
per month for 100% disability

(i) Not exceeding Rs.1,500 30% of pay subject to a
minimum of Rs. 300

(ii) Exceeding Rs.1,500 but 20% of pay subject to a
not exceeding Rs.3,000 minimum of Rs.450

(iii) Exceeding Rs.3,000 15% of pay subject to a

minimum of Rs. 600 and
maximum of Rs.1,250

For lower percentage of disability the monthly diability pension shall be
proportionately lower:

Provided that where permanent disability is not less than 60%, the total pension (i.e.,
pension or service gratuity admissible under the Ordinary Pension Rules plus
disability pension under EOP Rules) shall not be less than 60% of basic pay subject
to a minimum of Rs.750 and maximum of Rs.2,500.

157
 SCHEDULE Ill

[See Rule 123]

EXTRAORDINARY FAMILY PENSION

1. Family Pension to the widow/widower and children’s pension to each eligible child
separately shall not be paid. Only one consolidated extraordinary family pension shall be
payable to the seniormost beneficiary at a time on the same lines as is applicable for
payment of family pension under the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996. The rates of
consolidated extraordinary family pension will be inclusive of element of children’s pension

and also children’s education allowance.

2. The consolidated family pension shall be allowed at the following rates irrespective

of whether the deceased Government servant had completed 7 years of service or not:

Pay of the
Government servant
on the date of death

Monthly extra-
ordinary family
pension

(A) Where the deceased Government servant was not holding a pensionable post:

(i) 1116 widow is (i) Not exceeding Rs.1,500
childless

(ii) Exceeding Rs.1,500 but
not exceeding Rs.3,000

(iii) Exceeding Rs.3,000

(ii) If the widow In all cases
has child/
children

30% of pay subject
to a minimum of
Rs.300

20% of pay subject
to a minimum of
Rs.450

15% of pay subject
to a minimum

of Rs.600

and maximum of
Rs.1,250

40% of pay subject
to a minimum

of Rs.500 and
maximum of
Rs.1,500

(B) Where the deceased Government servant was holding a pensionable post:

(i) If the widow is (i) Not exceeding Rs.1,500
childless

(ii) Exceeding Rs.1,500 but

not exceeding Rs.3,000

(iii) Exceeding Rs.3,000

158

50% of pay

40% of pay subject
to a minimum of
Rs.750

30% of pay subject
to a minimum of
Rs.1,200 and
maximum of
Rs.2,500
 (ii) If the widow In all cases 60% of pay subject

has child/ to a minimum

children of Rs.750 and
maximum of
Rs.2,500

3. Family pension at the rates indicated at (A) (i) and (B) (i) above shall be paid to
the widow up to the date of death or remarriage, whichever is earlier. Family Pension at the
rates indicated at (A) (ii) and (B) (ii) above shall be paid to the widow till the child/children
attain the age prescribed under the family pension rules and thereafter the widow shall be
paid family pension at the rates indicated at (A) (i) and (B) (i) above.

4. In cases where the widow dies or remarries, the children shall be paid family
pension at the rates indicated at (A) (i) and (B) (i) above, as the case may be, and the same
rate shall also apply to fatherless/motherless children. In both cases, family pension shall be
paid to the children for the period during which they would have been eligible for ‘Family
Pension’ under Chapter V C of the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996. No children’s pension or
education allowance shall be paid in addition to the consolidated rates of family pension
indicated above. The dependent parents, brothers, sisters, etc., shall be paid family pension
at one-half of rate applicable to fatherless/motherless children subject to existing specified
conditions. Family pension shall be paid to the seniormost eligible beneficiary at a time.

159
 लि मं कि =

a

Place:

17.

NOTE

SCHEDULE IV
[Forms ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’, ‘D’ & ‘E']
[See Rule 127 (2) (ii)]
FORM A
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR DISABILITY PENSION

Name of the applicant and full Office address

Father’s name

Full Residential address (showing village, post office, district, State)

Present or last employment, including full particulars and address of the
Establishment

Date of entry into service

Full particulars of service and length of service, including interruption (both qualifying
and non-qualifying)

Percentage of Disability sustained due to Injury/Disease (as certified by the Medical
authorities) and circumstances which resulted in that disability

Pay at the time of injury sustained, disease contracted (as certified by the Medical
Authorities)

Pension claimed

Date of injury/disease (as certified by the Medical Authorities)

Place of Payment

Other relevant information, if any

*Date of applicant’s birth by Christian era

Height

Identification Marks

Thumb and finger impression:

Date on which the applicant
applied for pension:

Head of Office
- Thumb and finger impressions and particulars of height and personal marks are not
required to be given by such ladies, Gazetted Officers, Government title-holders and other
persons as are specifically exempted, by the Government by special orders in that behalf.

*

If not known exactly, please state on the best information or estimate and according
to the best of your knowledge and belief.

160
 FORM 8

[Rule 127 (2) (ii)]

FORM OF APPLICATION FOR FAMILY PENSION

Application for Extraordinary Pension for the family of the

late 91#1/शााए।धवधा.......................... .- -- ---------- killed or died of

Injury/Disease

claimed as being attributable to Government service.

Information regarding the claimant

1.

a kwh

Full name and address, residence
(showing village, Post Office,
District, State)

Age and date of birth
Height
Identification Marks

Present occupation and pecuniary
circumstances

Degree and nature of relationship
with the deceased

Information regarding the deceased

ds

Full name, Father’s name, residence
(indicating village, Post Office, District, State)
Particulars of post and service with full

name and address of the Establishment

Full particulars of service, length of service, etc.
Pay at the time of death
Date of birth
Age at the time of death
Injury/Disease

Nature of causing death.

Injuries/Diseases

(as per the Certificate of the Medical Authorities)
and the circumstances in which the same resulted.

Other Information

14.
15.
16.
17.

Amount of pension, etc., claimed
Place of Payment

Date from which benefit(s) claimed
Other relevant information, if any

161

Injuries/Diseases
 Iv. Names and ages of *surviving kindred of the deceased

Relation

Sons:
Widows:
Daughters:
Father:
Mother:

(Place)
(Date)

NOTE 1.-

NOTE 2.-

Place:

Name Date of birth by Christian era

Claimant

Please strike out the word or words not applicable.

If the deceased has left no son, widow, daughter, father or mother surviving
him, the word “none” or “dead” should be entered opposite to such relative.

Head of Office
Date........ Seal.

*

The term ‘child’ includes a posthumous child of the Government servant and is

covered by the term surviving kindred.

162
 FORM C
(Form to be used by the Medical Board when reporting on Injuries/Diseases/Death)
[Rule 127 (2) (iii)]
Instructions to be observed by the Medical Board while preparing the Report

(1) The Medical Board before recording their opinion should invariably consult the
proceedings of the previous Medical Board, if any, as also all previous Medical/Hospital
documents connected with the Government servant brought before them for examination, or
who has died.

(2) If the injuries/diseases be more than one, they should be numbered separately,
giving percentage of disability for each, with full details.

(3) In answering the questions in the prescribed Form, the Medical Board will confine
itself exclusively to the medical aspect of the case, and will carefully discriminate between
the Government servant’s/claimant’s unsupported statements and the documentary
evidence available.

(4) The Medical Board will not express any opinion, either to the Government servant
examined (or any of his relatives or friends, etc.) or in their Reports, as to whether he or his
family is entitled to compensation or as to the amount of it, nor will it inform the Government
servant or any other person connected with the Government servant of anything about the
nature of the Medical Report given by it.

(5) The Medical Board shall give their Report herein below in the light of the
provisions of these Rules (E.O.P.), particularly Schedules | and I-A, IV and the guidelines
appended thereto.

(6) The Report of the Medical Board, on each occasion, shall be supported by all the
necessary and full Medical and Hospital documents which shall be maintained and
preserved for reference, from time to time, as may be necessary, until the same would no
longer be required for reference.

Proceedings of the Medical Board
CONFIDENTIAL

Proceedings of the Medical Board assembled by the order Of ..............................---
for the purpose of examining and reporting on-

Injury/Disease
(i) the present state of the sustained/contracted by, or
Injuries/Diseases

(ii) death of 91॥/5शएग4ा........................- --------- OI NC मा मम
(please give date, month and year)

(a) State briefly the circumstances under which the
Injury/Disease
was/were sustained/contracted

Injuries/Diseases
or death occurred and the date thereof:

(b) What is the Government servant’s present condition?

163
 (c) Is the Government servant’s-
(i) present condition, or
(ii) death

Injury/Disease

wholly due to and reason as claimed?
Injuries/Diseases

If so, please explain fully how?

If not, please state to what other causes the

same is/are attributable.

(d) From which date it appears that the Government
servant has been
incapacitated on that account:
was
(e) Which is the date of injury/disease/death:

The opinion of the Board upon the questions below is as follows:-

PART A. FIRST EXAMINATION

Injury/Disease
1. The percentage of disability due to is %

Injuries/Diseases
[Please give herein below full details/justification about the
Injury/Disease

nature of the and for percentage of
Injuries/Diseases

disability certified, supported by faull/all medical and hospital documents with

reference to Schedule | and I-A to the E.O.P. Rules.]

Injury/Disease
2. For what period from the date of

Injuries/Diseases

(a) has the Government servant been

unfit for duty? From To
(b) is the Government servant likely to
remain unfit for duty? From To

164
 3. Other relevant information, if any.
Presiding Officer of the Medical Board.
Date:

Member of the Medical Board.

Member of the Medical Board.

PART B. SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT EXAMINATIONS
1. If the original degree of disability of the Government servant has changed, what is
the percentage of disability now?

(Please give here details of justification in support of your view along with all further
Medical and Hospital documents in full.)

Injury/Disease
2. For what period from the date of

Injuries/Diseases
(a) has the Government servant been unfit for duty?

(b) is the Government servant likely to remain unfit for duty?

Place: jg =  .. = = gies gasses ewessaecmvessecuNEREMEaA NEST eUEER

Date, ttt tttettt eee e eee e cee eecaeeeseneeeteneeeeees

Member of the Board.

NOTE - Please score out the word/words not applicable.

165
 FORM ‘D’
(Please see also Forms ‘C’ and ‘E’)
REPORT ON ACCIDENTAL AND SELF-INFLICTED INJURIES

1. Declaration by the injured person.

| hereby declare that the

(Number, rank, name and unit)

did*
injury sustained by me 01 .................------- occur while | was
did not*
in the performance of Government duty.
(Medical Officer before whom (Injured person)
the declaration is made)
SACI sersosincmnneenmresrrnonnnenvnraass Date......... SEATON ssc cismisercrorunnenrrecttomninnstinie Date.........

2. Nature, location and severity of injury.

NOTE - Hospital to be notified at once if wound is believed to be self-inflicted.

(Medical Officer)
3. Short statement of the circumstances of the case.
(Signed statements of witnesses giving a detailed account of the circumstances of

the accident must be attached to this Form. Place or sketch of place of accident and how it
occurred in cases of lorry, motor car or cycle accidents.)

4. Opinion of the Commandant/Head of Office.

(a) (i) Was the individual in the course of
performance of an official task or a task the
failure to do which would constitute an offence
triable under the disciplinary code applicable to
him? (Indicate the nature of the task, by whom
it was ordered and when)

or
(ii) Did the accident occur during the journey or
transport by a reasonable route under
organised arrangements from the individual's
quarter to or back from an appointed place of
duty? Cite and attach copies of standing
instructions or other orders in support, if the
journey or transport was officially organised,
also a sketch showing the reasonable route
from the individual’s quarter to the place of duty

or

* Strike out whichever is not applicable

166
 (iii) Was the individual participating in recreation
organised or permitted by service authorities?
Indicate the nature of the recreation, e.g., P.T.
Exercises including games. In case of games
and sports out of parade hours, cite and attach
copy of official orders to indicate that it was
organised or permitted by competent authority

or

(iv) Was the individual travelling either in a body or
singly under organised arrangements? (Cite
and attach copy of official orders to indicate
that the arrangements were organised by
competent authority)

or

(v) Was the individual proceeding to his leave
station or returning to duty from his leave
station? In either case, was the journey at
public expense or was_ performed on
concession voucher or at individual’s own
expense? [Give-

(1) the dates of commencement and termination of the period of leave;
(2) the name of the leave station; and

(3) particulars of the direct route from the place of duty to or from the leave

station.]
(b) Was the accident due wholly/partially to:
(i) serious negligence
and/or
(ii) misconduct of the individual? (Indicate the nature of the serious negligence or
misconduct and the grounds on which the opinion is based)
(c) Was any one else to blame for the accident? (If so indicate how and to what extent)
(d) Was the individual under the influence of intoxicating drink or drug at the material
time?
(e) Has any Court of Enquiry been held or will be held? [If so, indicate the date and the
place of the enquiry, and attach the Enquiry Report (in original)] @
1>1:110|॥ 7 Officer Commanding
Dale vvccvsccvsseuses

@

Head of Office

In all cases of death, Court of Enquiry must be held; so also in respect of disability
exceeding 20%.

167
 The injury/disability/death occurred in peace/field/operational Area and is/is not

attributable to Government service.

+ 1.G.P.

92 Station cesses
Head of Department
(D.G.P.)

+

To be completed and signed by OC unit if injury is not severe and no Court of Inquiry

is held.

168
 FOR USE ON FIELD SERVICE ONLY (Items 6-8)

(To be completed in all field service cases where injuries are, or are suspected to be
self-inflicted)

6. (a) Opinion of the Unit Commander

(b) Disciplinary action taken, or proposed, whether against injured individual or

another
Indicate casualty signal No.......... Commandant of Unit
बात Ko: | (ane ee ere
To
1.G.P.

DECISION OF I.G.,

8. The casualty should be reported as
Date
1.G.P.
To
D.G.P., Jaipur
NOTE - If the 1.G.P. decides that the casualty is to be reported as self-inflicted, he

should indicate how far he concurs with the opinions expressed above.

169
 FORM ‘E’
[See also Forms ‘C’ and ‘D’]

FORM FOR REPORT ON CASES (OTHER THAN THOSE
DUE TO INJURIES) WHICH HAVE ENDED FATALLY
OR ARE PROPOSED FOR INVALIDING
PART A

(To be filled by the M.O.)

particulars and office address, etc.
Disability

Outcome of the case, i.e., died or to be invalided

Medical Officer
PART B

(To be answered by the Officer Commanding Unit)

Circumstances of the case

1; Was the individual in your opinion of average
physique and stamina when he joined the unit?
2. (a) Was the individual, as far as you are aware, in
his normal health prior to the onset of the
illness?

(b) If you are aware of any previous illness from
which he suffered (which is not recorded in his
medical history), state its nature and duration

3. Was the individual employed on_ sedentary
duties/sheltered occupation? If so-

(a) had he to do P.T. and/or Parades?

(b) was he doing it regularly prior to falling ill or
had been exempted therefrom on account of ill-
health? If so, from which date?

170
 4.

(d)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(i)

(i

(५)

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

(iv)

(५)

Mention any circumstances of exposure giving
details thereof, and/or

State periods and conditions of service, at any
particular place, which you consider caused or
aggravated the illness.

Give the nature of duties he had to perform in
Government service

Was he subject to stress and strain by such
duties? If so, was it of an exceptional nature?
Give details

Diseases endemic to certain areas or disease
due to infection:

If disability or death was due to infection, is
there any evidence that the exposure was due
to negligence or misconduct on his part?

Did he live in unit lines or was he permitted to
live outside with his family?

How many out-passes was he granted during
the previous month and what was the date of
the last out-pass?

Was the disease endemic to the area he was
serving in and during this period or immediately
preceding it were there other cases of the
same disease in the unit? If so, give the
number of such cases, details of movements of
infected persons and _ state any _ other
circumstances which might have been
responsible for the disease

Give the date of last leave and places where
the leave was spent. Did illness start during
leave? If shortly after return from leave, state
date on which the illness commenced

Venereal Disease (Further information on the
points mentioned below) -

When was it contracted
Period of treatment

Whether after treatment the man returned to
full duty?

Whether after return to duty post hospital
surveillance and treatment was continued ac-
cording to existing regulations

After return to duty, was the man subjected to
any stress of an exceptional nature? If so,
mention the nature of exceptional stress

171
 5.

Do you consider that the death or disability was
attributable to or aggravated by service?

PART C

Head of the Department

(To be completed by Medical Officer concerned in all death cases)

(i) 110५ many cases of this disease were treated
during six months prior to admission of this
individual?

(ii) How many cases of this disease were
received from this unit? Give details of such
patients in chronological order

(iii) Was the infection endemic or was there any
outbreak of it in the local garrison?

(iv) Was there an outbreak of the disease in the
neighbouring city or village?

(v) What is your view of the source of infection?

In all cases state whether you consider the
death was attributable to or aggravated by
service and give the reasons on which you
base your opinion

Commanding Officer, Hospital

Chief Medical Officer, Presiding Officer of the Medical Board

Medical Officer, Member of the Medical Board.
Medical Officer, Member of the Medical Board.

172
 CHAPTER IX
PAYMENTS OF PENSIONS
128. Date from which pension becomes payable

(1) Except in the case of a Government servant to whom the provisions of 33 apply
and subject to the provisions of Rules 7 and 90, a pension other than extraordinary pension
under Chapter VIII and family pension shall become payable from the date on which a
Government servant ceases to be borne on the establishment.

(2) Pension including family pension shall be payable for the day on which its
recipient dies.

129. Currency in which pension is payable

All pensions including gratuities admissible under these rules shall be payable in
rupees in India only.

130. Manner of payment of gratuity and pension

(1) Except as otherwise provided in these rules, a gratuity shall be paid in lump sum.

(2) A pension fixed at monthly rates shall be payable monthly on or after the first day
of the following month.

NOTES

1. On receipt of the Pension Payment Order, the disbursing officer will deliver one
half to the pensioner and keep the other half carefully in such manner that the pensioner
shall not have access thereto.

2. Each payment made is to be entered on the reverse of both of the pensioner’s half
and of the Disbursing Officer’s half of the Pension Payment Order.

131. Date of payment of extraordinary pension

In cases where considerable delay has occurred in making application for an
extraordinary pension it will be granted only from the date of the report by the Medical Board
and no application for gratuity or pension will be entertained unless submitted within 5 years
of the wound or injury.

132. Application of Treasury Rules

Save as otherwise provided in these rules, the Treasury Rules of Rajasthan
Government shall apply in regard to the procedure of payment -

(i) of gratuity, and
(ii) of pension.
133. Personal appearance for identification

As a rule a pensioner must take payment in person after identification by comparison
with the Pension Payment Order.

173
 NOTE

A pensioner of rank may be privately identified by the Disbursing Officer and need
not be required to appear at a Public Office.

134. Authorities for signing a life certificate

(1) A pensioner of any description, who produces a life certificate signed by any
person specified hereunder is exempted from personal appearance -

(i) a person exercising the powers of a Magistrate under Criminal Procedure
Code;

(ii) a Registrar or Sub Registrar appointed under the Indian Registration Act;
(iii) Gazetted Officer;

(iv) a Police Officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector incharge of a Police
Station;

(v) a Post Master, a Departmental Sub-Post Master or an Inspector of Post
Offices;

(vi) a Class | Officer of the Reserve Bank of India or an officer of the State Bank
of India or Sub Accountant appointed as an agent or an Accountant at a
branch of the State Bank of India or by a Bank included in the second
schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1954;

(vii) | a Block Development Officer or Naib Tehsildar;

(viii) 3 Member of Parliament or State Legislative Assembly or Sarpanch of
Village Panchyat; or

(ix) a Pensioned Officer who before retirement exercised the powers of a
Magistrate.

(2) A pensioner not resident in India in respect of whom his duly authorised Agent
produces a life certificate signed by a Magistrate, a Notary, a Banker or a diplomatic
Respresntative of India is exempted from personal appearance.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISION

Except in the cases of payment of pensions through the Authorised Agents under
Rule 137, the life certificate shall be obtained once in six months where the payment is
desired to be made to an agent or representative of the pensioner under rule 135 and is not
received by him in person in terms of Rule 134.

135. Drawing of pension through an Agent

When a Pensioner draws his pension through an Agent or Representative, the claim
must be supported by the written authority of the pensioner to pay the pension to the Agent
or the Representative nominated by him to receive payment on his behalf. In such cases,
the endorsement “Received payment” must be signed by the pensioner and a separate
receipt which need not be stamped shall be endorsed by the Agent or the nominee, as the
case may be, in token of having actually received the payment.

136. Verification of continued existence of a pensioner once a year

(1) In all cases referred to in Rule 134, the Disbursing Officer must take precautions
to prevent impositions, and must at least once a year, require proof independent of that
furnished by the life certificate of the continued existence of the pensioner.

174
 (2) (i) For this purpose he should require the personal attendance and due
identification of all pensioners except -

(a) those exempted from personal appearance granted by the Government or
Collector of the concerned District;

(b) those women pensioners who are not accustomed to appear in public;

(c) those pensioners who are incapacitated by bodily illness or infirmity from so
attending.

(ii) In regard to the procedure to be followed for pensioners covered in the exceptions
mentioned in clause (i) above, the Disbursing Officer shall follow the provisions laid down in
the Treasury Manual.

(3) If the usual life certificate which accompanies the first bill presented on or after
April 1 is countersigned by a second responsible Government Officer or by any one of the
other persons authorised under rule 134, the pensioner need not be required to appear in
person for identification. The Disbursing Officer, however, in all cases of doubt, will be
competent to obtain proof of the existence of the pensioner independent of that furnished by
the life certificate and may ask the pensioner to appear in person for due identification.

NOTE

The Disbursing Officer is personally responsible for any payment wrongly made. In
case of doubt, he should consult the Director, Pension Department.

137. Drawing of pension through an authorised agent

(a) A pensioner not resident in India, may draw his pension at any treasury in India
through a duly authorised agent possessing a legally valid power of attorney who must
either produce a certificate by a Magistrate, a Notary, a Bank or a Diplomatic Representative
of India, on each occasion, that the pensioner was alive on the date to which his pension is
claimed or execute a bond to refund over payments and produce such a certificate as
aforesaid at least once a year.

(b) A pensioner of any description resident in India and is drawing his pension
through Banks or agents who have executed a general bond of indemnity or a special bond
of indemnity to cover pension payment made to particular pensioner or class of pensioners
from a particular station or stations need not be required to get the life certificate
accompanying the first bill presented on or after April 1, countersigned in the manner
prescribed in clause (c) of Rule 136.

NOTE

Scheme for payment of pensions through Public Sector Banks as notified by the
Government in the Finance (R&Al) Department, is appended with these Rules as
Appendix VI.

(c) The pension of an officer drawing his pension through an Agent who has
executed a bond to refund over-payments should not be paid on account of a period of more
than a year after the date of the life certificate last received and the Director, Pension
Department and the Disbursing Officer should be on the watch for authentic information of
the decease of any such pensioner and on receipt thereof, should promptly stop further
payments.

175
 138. Transfer of Payment to another State

(a) The Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, may, on an application (through
the Treasury Officer concerned) received from a pensioner drawing pension in Rajasthan
and who is desirous of drawing pension in another State, permit transfer of payment to that
Treasury in another State.

(b) The Treasury Officer while forwarding the request for transfer shall enclose
therewith both halves of Pension Payment Order recording thereon the last payment made
upto that date.

(c) The Director, Pension Department will then either issue a new Payment Order or
enface the payment order for payment at the new Treasury and move the Accountant
General of the State concerned to do so through the Accountant General, Rajasthan.

139. Transfer of payment from one Treasury to another or to a Sub Treasury under
a District Treasury

(1) A Treasury Officer may authorise payment in any of the Sub Treasuries
subordinate to his District Treasury of a pension payable under proper authority at his head
quarters, and may transfer the payment of a pension from such Sub Treasury to the District
Treasury or from one Sub Treasury to another in the same district.

(2) A Treasury Officer may on receipt of an application from the pensioner drawing
pension in his District Treasury or Sub Treasury under him, may permit transfer of the
payment to another Treasury in any District in Rajasthan, by forwarding both halves of the
Pension Payment Order and recording thereon the last payment made upto that date, under
intimation to the Director, Pension Department and the pensioner concerned.

140. Certificate of non-employment

(1) A pensioner drawing pension in India is required to append to his bill a certificate
of non employment as follows:-

“Certificate of non employment

| declare that | have not been serving in any capacity either under Central or State
Government, Local Fund or under a State/Central Government Company, Corporation,
Undertaking or autonomous body/statutory body, local body, cooperative society, institution
etc. wholly or substantially owned or controlled by the Central/State Government or in which
the Government has substantial financial interest or receiving Grant-in-aid from the
Government to meet its administrative expenditure or in Reserve Bank of India or in Public
Sector Bank or in General Insurance Corporation or Life Insurance Corporation etc. etc.”

(2) In the absence of the above certificate, the Dearness Relief and Interim Relief will
remain suspended till such employment/re-employment.

(3) In case where the amount of consolidated salary has been fixed on re-
employment without taking into consideration the element of dearness allowance, the
payment of Dearness Relief may be made by the Treasury Officer on receipt of such a
certificate from the concerned Appointing Authority, subject to the condition that the total
consolidated salary plus pension and Dearness Relief payable thereon on the date of
retirement does not exceed the pre-retirement emoluments. In case the total consolidated
salary plus dearness relief payable on the date of retirement exceeds the pre retirement
emoluments, only the difference between the Dearness Relief admissible and the excess
over the pre retirement emoluments shall be payable.

(4) In the case of a pensioner permitted under Chapter X to draw pension after re-
employment, the certificate prescribed under sub-rule (1) should be modified according to
the facts.

176
 (5) In the case of a pensioner drawing his pension through an agent, who has
executed the required Bond of Indemnity, the certificate modified accordingly may be signed
by the agent provided that the pensioner shall himself furnish, once a year, a certificate
covering the period for which pension has been drawn on the basis of the agent’s
certificates.

141. Renewal of Pension Payment Order

When the reverse of a Pension Payment Order is filled up or when the pensioner’s
half is found to be worn or torn, both halves may be renewed by the Treasury Officer.

142. Issue of New Pension Payment Order on loss

If a pensioner losses his half of the Pension Payment Order, a new order may be
issued by the Treasury Officer, who should see that no payment is made on the half alleged
to be lost by strict observance of Note (2) under Rule 130. The necessary note should be
made in the remarks column of the Register maintained at the Treasury.

143. Lapses and Forfeiture

(1) If a pension payable in India remains undrawn for more than one year, the
pension ceases to be payable.

(2) If the pensioner afterwards appears, the Disbursing Officer may renew his
payment.

(3) The arrears of pension may be paid by the Disbursing Officer -

(a) if the pension in arrears is to be paid for the first time in accordance
with the provisions of Rule 128;

(b) if the pension in arrears is to be paid not for the first time, and the
amount of arrears does not exceed ‘“Rs.50,000”.

(4) The arrears of pension exceeding ‘“Rs.50,000” under sub rule 3 (b) shall be paid
only with the previous sanction of the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan.

144. Payment of difference of pension to the missing pensioner on his reappearance

If a missing pensioner reappears at any time after grant of family pension as per
proviso to Rule 61, he shall be allowed the difference, if any, between the amount of service
pension and the amount of family pension already paid.

145. Payment of arrears of pension of deceased pensioner without producing of usual
legal authority

(1) The arrears of pension of a deceased pensioner may be paid to the heirs of the
deceased, without the production of the usual legal authority to the extent of “Rs.50,000”
under the orders of the Treasury Officer/ Pension Payment Officer after such enquiry into
the rights and title of the claimant as may be deemed sufficient. Any excess above
‘*Rs_50,000” may similarly be paid under the orders of the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan, on execution of an indemnity bond, with such sureties as he may require, if he is
satisfied of the right and the title of the claimant. In any case of doubt, payment should be
made only to the person producing legal authority.

1. The existing figure and word "Rs.25,000" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/97 dated 20.9.2004.

177
 (2) After payment of the arrears of pension, the Pension Payment Order should be
returned to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, with a report of date of death of
the pension, in case no family pension has been authorised in that Pension Payment Order.

146. Payment of arrears of pension of “unheard of” pensioner

The arrears of pension for the period of non drawal of service pension by the
pensioner who had disappeared, to the date of start of family pension under proviso to Rule
61 shall be paid on completion of one year of drawal of family pension, if the pensioner has
not reappeared during this period. The arrears would be given at the rate of family pension
specified in Rule 62 but not exceeding the rate of service pension.

147. Payment of arrears of family pension under second proviso to rule 61 in case of
a missing Government Servant

After one year of drawal of family pension under second proviso to rule 61 in case
of a missing Government servant, the family shall be paid arrears of family pension at rates
already sanctioned, from the date of missing of the Government servant to the date of start
of family pension, provided the Government servant has not reappeared during this period.

148. No claim to pension of heirs when a Government servant dies before retirement
or discharge

If a Government servant dies before actually retiring or being discharged his heirs
have no claim to anything in respect of his pension except to the extent and subject to the
conditions specified in Chapter V of these Rules.

178
 CHAPTER X

FIXATION OF PAY OF RE-EMPLOYED PENSIONERS
149. Applicability

(1) Save as otherwise provided in these Rules, the rules in this Chapter shall apply to
all persons who are re-employed in Civil Services and posts in connection with the affairs of
Rajasthan Government after retirement on pension, gratuity, and/or Contributory Provident
Fund benefits from the services of the Union Government, State Governments including
Rajasthan, Public Sector Undertakings, Local Bodies, Autonomous Bodies like Universities
or semi-Government Organisations.

(2) These rules shall not apply to -

(a) Persons re-employed after resignation or removal, provided they have not
received any retirement/terminal benefits for the pre-employed service;

(b) Persons paid from Contingencies;

(c) Persons re-employed in posts, expenditure of which is not debitable to
the Civil estimates of the Rajasthan Government;

d) Persons on casual or daily rated or part time employment;
e) Persons appointed as Consultants on payment of consolidated fees;
f) Persons appointed on work charged capacity.

g) Persons re-employed on contract basis, unless specifically provided for in
the contract agreement.

(h) Persons engaged on consolidated remuneration after retirement as
referred in rule 140(3) of these rules.

150. Definition

In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires -

(a) ‘Pension’ means the gross monthly pension or pension equivalent of
Government’s contribution to C.P.F. and/or other retirement benefits, if any,
payable under the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, or other relevant rules of
the Government or the body under which the re-employed pensioner was
serving prior to his retirement. Where the pension has been commuted partly
or fully, pension means the gross pension payable prior to commutation.

(b) ‘Pre Retirement Pay’ means the emoluments, as defined in rule 45 of R.C.S.

(Pension) Rules, 1996, last drawn before retirement, but will not include
special pay and personal pay, if any.

151. Re-employment after superannuation or retiring pension

A Government servant who is in receipt of Superannuation or Retiring Pension shall
not be re-employed or continue to be employed in service paid from the Consolidated Fund
or from a Local Fund, except on public grounds. Sanction to re-employment *"( )" may be
given by the Administrative Department with the concurrence of the Department of
Personnel.

NOTES
1. Also refer to Government of Rajasthan’s Decision 2 below Rule 30.

1. The existing words "or extension of the term of employment" deleted vide FD Notification No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/98 dated 8.7.1998
w.e.f. 27.6.1998.

179
 2. Government may declare that the restrictions contained in this Rule shall not apply to
any particular Local Fund or to Local Funds of any particular class in its territories or
that they shall apply subject to such modifications as it may direct.

152. Fixation of pay of re-employed pensioners

(a) Re-employment pensioners shall be allowed to draw pay only in the
prescribed scales of pay for the posts in which they are re-employed. No protection of the
scales of pay of posts held by them prior to retirement shall be given.

(b) (i) In all cases where the pension is fully ignored, the initial pay on re-
employment shall be fixed at the minimum of the scale of pay of the
re-employed post.

(ii) In cases where the entire pension and pensionary benefits are not
ignored for pay fixation, the initial pay on re-employment shall be fixed
at the same stage as the last pay drawn before retirement. If there is
no such stage in the re-employed post, the pay shall be fixed at the
stage below that pay. If the maximum of the pay scale in which a
pensioner is re-employed is less than the last pay drawn by him
before retirement, his initial pay shall be fixed at the maximum of the
scale of pay of the re-employed post. Similarly, if the minimum of the
scale of pay in which a pensioner is re-employed is more than the last
pay drawn by him before retirement his initial pay shall be fixed at the
minimum of the scale of pay of the re-employed post. However, in all
these cases, the non-ignorable part of the pension shall be reduced
from the pay so fixed.

(c) The re-employed pensioner will in addition to pay as fixed under sub rule (b)
above shall be permitted to draw separately any pension sanctioned to him and retain any
other form of retirement benefits.

(d) In the case of persons retiring before attaining the age of 55 years and who
are re-employed, pension (excluding pension equivalent of gratuity and other forms of
retirement benefits) shall be ignored for initial pay fixation to the following extent:-

(i) In the case of ex servicemen who held posts below commissioned
officer's rank in the Defence Forces and in the case of other retired
Government servants who held posts other than State Service posts
at the time of their retirement, the entire pension and pension
equivalent of retirement benefits shall be ignored.

(ii) In the case of service officers belonging to Defence Forces and State
Government pensioners who were members of the State Services at
the time of their retirement, the first Rs.1500/-" of the pension shall
be ignored.

(e) The pay fixed under sub rules (a) to (d) and gross pension taken together
shall not exceed 2"Rs.26,000" p.m.

3"GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

Persons re-employed in Government service after retirement have been excluded
from the purview of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised Pay Scale) Rules, 1998 vide Rule
2(ii) (d) & (e) thereof. The question of extension of the benefit of the revised pay scales rules
to these persons and the procedure to be followed for fixing their pay in the revised pay
scales has been under consideration of the Government. The Governor is pleased to decide

1. The existing words and figures "Rs. 500/-" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.

2. The existing words and figures "Rs. 8000/-" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e-f.
1.10.1996.

a Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/98 dated 30.6.1998.

180
 that in partial modification of Rule 2 (ii) (d) & (6) of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised
Pay Scales) Rules, 1998, the provisions of these rules shall apply to such persons also who
were in re-employment on ist September, 1996, subject to the orders hereinafter contained.
This decision will be applicable to all the Government servants re-employed in Government
service, after retirement from a civil post or from the armed forces, other than those re-
employed on contact. However, in cases where emoluments during contract appointment
were fixed on the basis pay minus pension and in such cases payment of dearness relief
and interim relief on pension was not made admissible, this decision will apply and the pay
will be revised as per conditions hereinafter contained.

2. Method of Fixation of Pay of re-employed persons drawing pay in the existing
pay scale :
(i) The initial pay of a re-employed Government servant who elects or is deemed

to have elected to be governed by the revised pay scale from the 1st day of
September, 1996 shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of Rule 11
of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised Pay Scales) Rules, 1998, if he is -

(1) a Government servant who retired without receiving a pension,
gratuity or any other retirement benefit; and

(Il) a retired Government servant who received pension or any other
retirement benefits but which were fully ignored while fixing pay on re-
employment.

(ii) The initial pay of a re-employed Government servant who retired with a
pension or any other retirement benefit and whose pay was fixed on re-
employment with reference to these benefits or ignoring a part thereof, and
who elects or is deemed to have elected to be governed by the revised pay
scales from the 1st day of September, 1996 shall be fixed in accordance with
the provisions contained in Rule 11 of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised
Pay Scales) Rules, 1998. For the purpose of fixation of pay in the revised pay
scale, the 'pre-revised emoluments’ as defined in Rule 5(4) of the aforesaid
rules shall also include pension or non ignorable part of pension, as the case
may be. However, an amount equivalent to the revised pension i.e.
consolidated pension inclusive of commuted portion (excluding the existing
ignorable portion of pension, wherever permissible) shall be deducted from
his pay on fixation of pay in the revised pay scale of the re-employed
pensioners.

(iii) After pay in the revised pay scale is fixed in the manner indicated (i) and (ii)
above, increment will be allowed in the manner laid down in Rule 12 of
Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised Pay Scales) Rules, 1998. If the pay is fixed
at the maximum of the revised pay scale no further annual increment shall be
admissible in the revised pay scale.

3. Exercise of option for revised pay scale :

Re-employed persons who become eligible to elect revised pay scales in accordance
with these orders should exercise their option in the manner laid down in Rule 10 of the
Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised Pay Scales) Rules, 1998 within three months of the date
of issue of these orders.

4. Fixation of pay from subsequent date :

Where a re-employed Government servant elects to draw his pay in the existing
scale and is brought over to revised pay scale from a date later than the 1st day of
September, 1996, his pay from later date in the revised pay scale shall also be fixed in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 15 of the Rajsathan Civil Services (Revised Pay
Scales) Rules, 1998.

181
 5. Fresh fixation on the basis of revised ignorable pension :

In the case of persons retired retiring before attaining the age of 55 years from
Defence Forces or other civil posts and re-employed in the State Government -

(a) the existing limit of pension to be ignored while fixing pay on re-employment
has been raised from Rs.500/- to Rs.1500/- per month with effect from
1.9.1996 vide FD Notification No. F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.3.1998.

(b) full pension is ignorable as per clause (d) of Rule 152 of Rajasthan Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 effective from 1.10.1996, in case of persons
retiring form posts below Commissioned Officer's rank in Defence Forces and
in case of other retired Government servants who held posts other than State
Service posts at the time of retirement.

If re-employed persons want to avail themselves of the benefit as indicated at (a) and
(b) above, the pay on re-employment would be determined afresh as if they have been re-
employed for the first time on the date one wishes to avail the benefit of the above
mentioned provisions.

6. Grant of Dearness Allowances and Interim Relief on net pay due to revision of
pension (Consolidation) :

In the case of All India Service officers retired prior to 1.1.1996 and re-employed
during the period from 1.1.1996 to 31.12.1996 and whose pay on re-employment was fixed
on last pay minus non-ignorable pension. Dearness allowance and interim relief for the
period from the date of re-employment to 31.12.1996 shall be admissible on net pay and not
on the total of pay plus non-ignorable pension. since on account of revision of pension,
dearness relief as on 1.1.1996 and first two instalments of interim relief have been merged
in pension.

7. Fixation of pay on re-employment of Government servants who retired while
drawing pay in the pre-revised pay scales but re-employed on or after 1.9.1996
in a prescribed pay scale.

In such cases for the purpose of fixation of pay on re-employment the pre-retirement
pay shall be re-determined with reference to the method of fixation of pay laid down in Rule
11 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised Pay Scales) Rules, 1998 and only thereafter pay
shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions contained in the Chapter X of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996. Pre-revised pay for this purpose shall mean pay last
drawn -

(a) Prior to 1.1.1996 in respect to re-employed AIS officers and Military
personnel.

(b) prior to 1.9.1996 in respect of re-employed State Government employees.

8. Revision of pay last drawn in cases of re-employment of Government servants
on posts carrying no prescribed pay scale.

In cases where a retired Government servant has been re-employed on last pay
drawn minus pension and there is no prescribed pay scale of the post on which he is re-
employed, his last pay shall be revised by adding the following -

Last pay

D.A. admissible as per rates effective on 1.1.1996
First two instalments of Interim Relief ; and

40% of basic pay

PONS

The total of above items shall be taken as revised pay from which the consolidated
pension shall be deducted.

182
 9. Payment of Allowances :

DA/ HRA/CCA shall be admissible on revised pay fixed before deducting the non
ignorable part of the pension or on the maximum of the pay scale whichever is less,
however, if the re-employment is not on a post carrying a pay scale the condition of
maximum of pay scale shall not apply.

10. Non-admissible o Dearness Relief :

During the period of re-eemployment/ employment Dearness Relief on pension/ family
pension shall not be admissible.

11. Impounding of arrear of Pay and Allowances in General Provident Fund :

The amount of arrear for the period from 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997 accruing as a result
of fixation of pay in the revised pay scale, if any, shall be credited to the respective General
Provident Fund Account of the employees as per provisions contained in Finance
Department Order No.F.2(1)FD(Rules)/97 dated 17.2.1998. In cases where the General
Provident Fund Accounts are not existing, new accounts may be opened.

12. Recovery of over payment of salary, if any, on account of re-fixation of pay :

There may be cases in which as a result of fixation of pay in the revised pay scale
and on account of consolidation/ revision of pension, some amount becomes recoverable
from the re-employed pensioners, the same shall be recovered from the pay of subsequent
months or arrear of pension or from monthly pension. In cases, where the due amount can
not be recovered from pay, to the extent of this due, it shall be recovered from the arrear
amount of pension and the balance amount only shall be deposited in the General Provident
Fund accounts of the pensioner or paid instalments as per his option as given in Finance
Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated March 21, 1998.

13. Non accrual of arrears :

Notwithstanding anything contained in this order no arrear of pay and allowances
thereon, on any account, shall accrue to a re-employed Government servant during the
period from 1.9.1996 to 31.12.1996.”

‘"(2) GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

The undersigned is directed to invite attention towards the provisions contained in
FD Memorandum of even number dated 30.6.1998. It has been represented to the
Government that most of the ex-serviceman could not get adequate benefit of revision of
pay scale. This matter has been reconsidered in the light of hardship caused to them. The
Governor is pleased to order that ex-serviceman below the rank of Commissioned Officer
whose pay on re-employment in State Government service has been fixed on the basis of
last pay minus non-ignorable pension may be refixed, at their option, on notional basis at
the minimum of the pay scale of the post held w.e.f. 1.7.1986 or the date of appointment,
whichever is later, and thereafter the pay may be arrived at on notional basis upto 31.8.96
including selection grades admissible, if any, or immediately before the date of option for
Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised Pay Scales) Rules, 1998, whichever is later. The fixation
of pay in the Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised Pay Scales) Rules, 1998 may be made on
the basis of notional pay so arrived at in accordance with the provisions contained in para
2(i)(II) of FD Memorandum of even number dated 30.6.1998. The employee whose pay is
fixed in accordance with the provision of this order will be entitled to Dearness Relief on
military pension w.e.f. 18.7.1997 or from the date of option, whichever is later.

41. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/98 dated 20.9.2000.

183
 The respective employee shall have an option to re-elect for fixation of pay in the
Rajasthan Civil Services (Revised Pay Scales) Rules, 1998 in accordance with the
provisions contained in this Memorandum. The option will have to be exercised within six
months from the date of issue of this order.

Rest of the provisions shall be applicable as is contained in the aforesaid
Memorandum dated 30.6.1998."

153. Drawal of increments

Once the initial pay of re-employed pensioner has been fixed in the manner indicated
above, he may be allowed to draw normal increments in the time scale of the post to which
he is appointed as if the pay has been fixed at the minimum or the higher stage, as the case
may be (i.e. before an adjustment on account of pension is made) provided that the pay and
gross pension taken together do not at any time exceed “Rs.26,000" per month.

154. Personnel retiring on Invalid or Compensation pension

Persons who are re-employed after obtaining compensation or invalid pension will
also be governed by these rules subject to the condition that if the re-employment is in
qualifying service, they may either retain their pension, in which cases their former service
will not count for future pension, or cease to draw any part of their pension and count their
previous service. Pension intermediately drawn need not be refunded. In case the
pensioners elect to count their previous service for pension by forgoing their entire pension
including death/retirement gratuity, their pay would be fixed by treating them as if they are
not in receipt of any pension.

NOTE

If a re-employed Government servant does not exercise the option provided under
rule 154 above within three months from the date of his reemployment, it shall be presumed
by the competent authority that the concerned re-employed Government servant has opted
to retain his pension and for not counting his former service for future pension.

155. Promotion/Transfer

On regular promotion/transfer to another post, pay of the re-employed pensioner
shall be fixed under the provisions of the Rajasthan Service Rules with reference to the pay
in the previous re-employment post (before adjustment). Adjustment from the pay so fixed,
on account of pension shall be continued to be made to the same extent as was being made
earlier. This will, however, remain subject to the condition that pay plus pension shall not
exceed ?”Rs.26,000" per month at any time.

156. Allowances

The drawal of various allowances and other benefits based on pay shall be
regulated with reference to the pay that is fixed on re-employment. Pay for these allowances
and benefits will be the pay fixed before deducting the non-ignorable part of the pension.

157. Special pay on re-employment

Special pay on re-employment should be based on the nature of the duties attached
to the post on which re-employment is made. If the post on which re-employment is made
carries a special pay and an officer normally appointed to the post would have been entitled
to that special pay, the re-employed officers should also be considered eligible for the grant
of special pay; otherwise not, subject to the condition that the total pay on re-employment
and pension should not exceed 2"Rs.26,000" p.m.

1. The existing words and figures "Rs. 8000/-" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 20.5.1999 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.
2 The existing words and figures "Rs. 8000/-" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.

184
 158. Leave and leave salary

In the case of persons re-employed after retirement, the provisions contained in the
Rajasthan Service Rules regarding leave and leave salary shall apply. [Also refer
clarification No.3 at the end of this Chapter]

159. Gratuity, Death/Retirement Gratuity

Re-employed employees shall not be eligible for any gratuity, death/retirement
gratuity for the period of re-employment except in those cases covered in Rules 18 and 19
of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.

160. Retrenched employees

In the case of those Government servants who are retrenched from service and are
not granted pension and/or service gratuity, on their appointment to Government Service,
they may be granted advance increments equal to the completed years of service rendered
by them on a basic pay equal to or higher than the minimum of the scale attached to the
post in which they are employed. The pay so arrived at should not, however, exceed the
basic pay drawn by them in their previous employment. The provisions relating to grant of
advance increments shall also be applicable in cases where only service gratuity in lieu of
pension was paid, subject to the condition that the amount of service gratuity received by
him is refunded to the Government in suitable instalments not exceeding thirty six.

161. Extra ordinary pension admissible during re-employment

Notwithstanding anything contained in the rules in this Chapter, a wound or other
Extra ordinary pension sanctioned under Chapter VIII of the R.C.S (Pension) Rules, 1996,
and a wound or injury or disability pension or a disability addition to pension awarded under
the military rules shall continue to be drawn by a retired Government servant, civil or military,
during re-employment or continued employment, and shall be subject only to the conditions
of its award. The amount of such pension or addition to pension shall not be taken into
account when fixing the pay during re-employment or continued employment.

NOTE

Where the military pension is consolidated and service and disability elements are
not explicitly differentiated, the total pension may be split in the following manner. The
service portion of the pension will be represented by the service pension earned or, if no
service pension has been earned, by the proportionate service pension calculated with
reference to the minimum ordinary pension admissible for the actual length of service
rendered. The disability portion of the pension will be the balance.

162. Pensioner to declare amount of pension to the appointing authority

When a person who was formerly in the civil or military employment of any
Government in India or other organisations mentioned in rule 149 (1) obtains re-
employment, whether temporarily or permanently, in Government service or in the service of
a Local Fund, it shall be incumbent on him to declare to the appointing authority the amount
of any gratuity bonus or pension granted to him in respect of the previous employment. The
authority re-appointing him shall specifically state in the order of re-appointment whether
any deduction is to be made from pension or salary as required by the rules of this Chapter
and shall communicate a copy of the Order to the Director, Pension Department.

185
 NOTES

4. The principle of this Rule applies in the case of continued employment on
retirement from Government service. The amount of the pension to be declared is that
sanctioned originally, i.e. it shall be inclusive of any amount that may have been commuted.

2. For the purposes of re-employment, a compassionate allowance is the
equivalent of a compensation or invalid pension. The rules regarding re-employment of
pensioners are, therefore, equally applicable to the case of persons in receipt of such
allowance, and the recipient of a compassionate allowance if re-employed is in the same
position in respect of his title to draw his allowance during re-employment as the re-
employed recipient of a compensation or invalid pension.

163. Details to be called for from the Head of Office/Director, Pension Department

For the correct determination of pay, the competent authorities shall obtain the
particulars of pay drawn on the date of retirement on which the pension was based and the
post held by him immediately before retirement, from the Head of the Office who processed
the pension case. In the particulars of the pay drawn, the basic pay, special pay and
personal pay counted as emoluments shall be shown separately. The information relating to
pension including commuted amount shall be collected from the Pension Payment Order. In
the case of any doubt or non-availability of any data, the Director, Pension Department shall
be referred to.

After getting the above information, the competent authority shall fix the pay of the
re-employed Government servant under the provisions of these Rules.

164. Authority competent to fix the pay

Competent authorities to whom the powers of re-employing persons have been given
will be competent to fix the pay of the retired employees re-employed under them in
accordance these Rules provided that the post in which the employee is re-employed
already carries a sanctioned scale of pay. Cases in which a scale of pay has not been
sanctioned for the post will be referred to the Government in the Finance Department.

CLARIFICATIONS

(1) ‘Pay fixed on re-employment’ is the pay fixed before making any adjustment
on account of non-ignorable amount of pension. The future increments are to be granted on
the basis of pay so fixed.

(2) In terms of rule 156, pay for the purpose of grant of allowances shall be the
pay fixed on re-employment before adjusting pension.

(3) During the period of leave, re-employed pensioners shall draw leave salary
based on the pay drawn by them exclusive of the pension.

(4) In fixing the initial pay of the re-employed pensioner, the pension equivalent
of gratuity shall not be deducted from the pay so fixed.

(5) In case of discharge/retirement of service personnel (below Officer rank),
information regarding gross retirement benefits shall be obtained from the Records Office
concerned and need not to be referred to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pensions).
The information furnished by the Records Office may be treated as authentic. It is, however,
open to the competent authority to verify the information furnished by reference to the
Pension Certificate issued to the individual.

186
 (6) If after re-employment, a re-employed government servant has been granted
pension or revised pension, the initial pay or pay from the date of effect of such
sanction/revision, shall be refixed in accordance with the rules contained in this Chapter.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

(1) Dearness relief on pension is not payable during the period of re-
employment - According to rule 77, the payment of relief on pension shall be suspended
when a Government pensioner is (i) employed/re-employed in a Department/Office of the
Central/State Government (ii) employed or re-employed or absorbed permanently in a
Central Government or a State Government Company/Corporation/ Undertaking or
Autonomous Body or in Nationalized Bank including Reserve Bank of India and the State
Bank of India or in a ‘Local Fund’ as defined in clause (n) of sub rule (1) of Rule 3 of R.C.S
(Pension) Rules, 1996, etc.

Accordingly, no relief on pension should be paid by the pension disbursing authority
(including Treasuries, Public Sector Banks entrusted with pension payment work) to the
employed/re-employed pensioner (including family pensioner either before or after of
pension) during the period of his/her employment or re-employment. After the spell of
employment/re-employment ceases, payment of relief will be revived by the same authority
(without the intervention of Treasury/Director, Pension Department etc.) For this purpose,
every pensioner (including family pensioner) is required to furnish half-yearly, in the months
of May and November, a certificate in the prescribed form (see rule 140) about non re-
employment, to the pension disbursing authority or facts about his/her status of being
employed/re-employed. In the latter case, he/she must furnish particulars of the
employment/re-employment, e.g. name of the Central/State Government Department/Office
or of the Government Company or Corporation or of the Autonomous Body or a Local Fund,
etc. as the case may be. The pensioner should intimate the fact of his taking up/having
taken up re-employment to the pension disbursing authority, immediately on doing so
without waiting for the month of May or November when the submission of half yearly
certificate becomes due.

(2) Release of pension of retired Government servant re-employed in bodies
other than Government Departments i.e. in Government undertakings, Companies
and Corporations - A question has arisen as to how the payment of pension should be
regulated in the case of re-employment of Government servants in Government
undertakings, Companies and Corporations when the terms of re-employment have not
been settled by the competent authority.

It has been decided that the pension of retired Government servants employed in
Government Undertakings, Companies and Corporations may be released by the Director,
Pension under intimation to the authority competent to sanction re-employment which may
regulate the pay on re-employment suitably.

The fact of re-employment of a retired Government servant together with the terms of
re-employment should invariably and promptly be reported by the organisation concerned to
the Director, Pension Department.

‘"(3) In accordance with the provisions of Rule 77 and GRD No.1 appearing below
Rule 164 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 and_ order
No.F.1(36)FD(Gr.2)/87 dated 10.8.1998 inforce prior to the date of introduction of aforesaid
rules, the payment of Dearness Relief on pension/family pension remains suspended during
the period of re-eemployment/employment and hence it is not payable.

1. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/98 dated 28.12.1998.

187
 It has been brought to the notice of the Government that some of the military
pensioners are drawing Dearness Relief on pension during the period of re-
employment/employment in contravention of the provisions of the aforesaid rules.

Accordingly all appointing authorities/drawing and disbursing officers are directed to
ask the re-employed military pensioner to furnish a certificate of non-drawal of Dearness
Relief on pension from the pension payment authorities of military/pension paying branch of
the respective Banks. In case some of the military pensioner have actually drawn Dearness
Relief on pension, they may be asked to refund the over payment drawn and to furnish a
certificate of non-drawal of Dearness Relief on pension since appointment in the
Government service.

All Drawing and Disbursing Officers shall be required to record a certificate in the
salary bill of re-employed military personnel that the certificate of non drawal of Dearness
Relief on pension have been obtained from the Pension Payment Officer/Paying Branch of
the Bank. This certificate shall invariably be recorded by them in the salary bill for the month
of January and June every year. It will be the duty of the respective Treasury Officer to
ensure that the requisite certificate has been recorded by the concerned Drawing and
Disbursing Officer in the salary bill before they are passed for payment."

(4) In accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 77 and GRD No.1

appearing below Rule 164 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 and
Memorandum of even number dated 28.12.1998, the payment of Dearness Relief on
pension remains suspended during the period of re-employment and hence it is not payable.

Now, the Government of India have allowed payment of Dearness Relief (D.R.) on
pension w.e.f. 18.7.1997 to re-employed Central pensioners whose pay have been fixed at
the minimum of the pay scale of the post in which they have been re-employed/ are re-
employed.

Accordingly, in partial modification of the aforesaid rule/ order, the Governor is
pleased to order that Central pensioners, except of group 'A' Officers and Commissioned
Officers, who have been allowed minimum of the pay scale on their re-employment in the
State Government, may be permitted to draw Dearness Relief on their pension from
Government of India. The respective appointing authorities shall issue a certificate indicating
the following :-

"The entire amount of pension sanctioned by the Government of India was ignored in
fixation of initial pay on re-employment i.e., no part of pension was taken into
account in fixation of pay in the pay scale of the post in which Central pensioner was
re-employed. In other words, the initial pay on re-employment was fixed at the
minimum of the pay scale of the post."

1. Inserted vide FD Memorandum No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/98 dated 30.9.2000.

188
 CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS

165. Interpretation

Where any doubt arises as to the interpretation of these rules, it shall be referred to
the Government in the Finance Department for decision.

166. Power to relax

Where the Government is satisfied that the operation of any of these rules, causes
undue hardship in any particular case, it may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
dispense with or relax the requirements of that rule to such extent and subject to such
exceptions and conditions as it may consider necessary for dealing with the case in a just
and equitable manner:

Provided that no such order shall be made except with the concurrence of the
Finance Department.

167. Power to delegate

Government may delegate to any of its officers subject to any conditions which it
may think fit to impose, any power conferred upon or taken under these rules except the
powers under rule 166 and 167.

168. Repeal and Saving

(1) On the commencement of these rules, every rule, regulation or order
including any Notification, circular etc. (hereinafter referred to in this rule as the old rule) in
force immediately before such commencement shall, in so far as it provides for any of the
matters contained in these rules, cease to operate.

(2) Notwithstanding such ceaser of operation -

(a) (i) every nomination for the payment of death-cum-retirement
gratuity, and

(ii) every form regarding the details of family of a Government
servant for the purpose of Family Pension.

(b) any nomination for the payment of death-cum-retirement gratuity or
any form regarding the details of family of a Government servant for
the purpose of Family Pension, 1964, required to be made or given by
a Government servant under the old rule but not made or given before
the commencement of these rules shall be made or given after such
commencement in accordance with the provisions of these rules;

(c) any case which pertains to the authorisation of pension to a
Government servant who had retired before the commencement of
these rules and is pending before such commencement shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of old rule as if these
rules had not been made;

(d) any case which pertains to the authorisation of death-cum-retirement
gratuity and family pension to the family of a deceased Government
servant or of a deceased pensioner and is pending before the
commencement of these rules shall be disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of old rule as if these rules had not been made;

189
 (e) subject to the provisions of clauses (c) and (d), anything done or any
action taken under the old rule shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of these rules.

By order of the Governor,

DR. ADARSH KISHORE
Secretary to the Government.

190
 APPENDIX 1
RAJASTHAN CIVIL SERVICES

(COMMUTATION OF PENSION) RULES, 1996

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
(Rules Division)

NOTIFICATION

No. F.1(6)FD(Rules)96 Jaipur, dated the 18" Sept., 1996.

In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution,
the Governor hereby makes the following rules, namely :-

CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement -
(1) These rules may be called the Rajasthan Civil Services (Commutation of
Pension) Rules, 1996.
(2) They shall come into force with effect from 1.10.1996.

2. Application -

These rules shall apply to Government servants who may be entitled to or have been
authorised any class of pension referred to in Chapter Ill of the Rajasthan Civil Services
(Pension) Rules, 1996.

3. Definitions -

(1)

In these rules unless the context otherwise requires—

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

“Director, Pension” means the Director, Pension and Pensioners
Welfare Department Rajasthan, Jaipur.

“applicant” means a Government servant, including a_ retired
Government servant, who applies for commutation of fraction of
pension in the prescribed form.

“death retirement gratuity” means the gratuity payable under Rule 55 of
Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.

“disbursing authority” means:-
(i) | treasury including sub-treasury, or
(ii) Pension Payment Officer, or

(iii) branch of a nationalised bank,

from where the applicant is receiving pension authorised under the Pension
Rules;

191
 (e)
(f)
(9)

(h)
(i)

(i)

(k)

“Form” means a Form appended to these rules;
“Government” means the Government of Rajasthan.

“Head_ of Office” means a gazetted officer declared as such by a Head
of Department under Rule 3 of General Financial & Accounts Rules.

“Medical authority” means medical authority referred to in rule 20.

“pension” means any class of pension referred to in Chapter Ill of
Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.

“Pension Rules” means the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules,
1996.

“Table” means a table appended to these rules.

(2) The words and expressions used in these rules but not defined shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension)

Rules, 1996.

192
 CHAPTER Il
GENERAL CONDITIONS

4. Restriction on commutation of pension -

(1) No Government servant against whom departmental or judicial proceedings
as referred to in Rule 7 of the Pension Rules, have been instituted before the date of
his retirement, or the pensioner against whom such proceedings are instituted after
the date of his retirement, shall be eligible to commute a fraction of his provisional
pension authorised under Rule 90 of the Pension Rules or the pension, as the case
may be, during the pendency of such proceedings.

(2) No Government servant who has been granted provisional pension pending
determination of final pension shall be eligible to commute a fraction of his
provisional pension.

5. Limit on commutation of pension -

(1) A Government servant shall be entitled to commute for a lump sum payment
a fraction not exceeding one-third of his pension.

(2) In an application for commutation in Form 1 or Form 2, as the case may be,
an applicant shall indicate the fraction of pension which he desires to commute and
may either indicate the maximum limit of one-third of pension or such lower limit as
he may desire to commute.

(3) If fraction of pension to be commuted results in fraction of rupee, such
fraction of a rupee shall be ignored for the purpose of commutation.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

(1) Permissible limit of commutation when part of pension is withheld:-

Under the Commutation Rules, a pensioner can commute one-third of the pension
that has been granted under the rules. When a part of pension is withheld or withdrawn
under Rule 6 of R.C.S.(Pension) Rules, 1996 the residual amount is the amount that has
been granted under the rules from the date of withholding or withdrawal of a part of the
pension. As such, if commutation is applied for after this date, the admissible amount that
can be commuted will have to be calculated with reference to the pension payable to the
person after that date. Commutation rules do not state that the commutable amount is to be
calculated with reference to the pension originally granted to the person.

(2) Commutation on invalid pension allowed only on original amount before
enhancement:-

According to clause (c) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 54 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, the
amount of invalid pension shall not be less than the amount of family pension admissible
under sub-rule (i) of Rule 62 ibid. It is clarified that where the amount of invalid pension
calculated with reference to the qualifying service and the average emoluments is less than
the family pension determined under sub-rule(i) of Rule 62, the invalid pension should be
enhanced to the level of family pension. For the purpose of commutation of pension, the
amount of original invalid pension will only be taken into account.

1"(3) Commutation shall be allowed on the minimum pension of Rs.1275/- if the actual

pension is less than Rs.1275/-."

te The existing "GRD No. 3" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/97 dated 27.7.1998 w.e.f. 1.10.1996.
The provisions regarding non accrual of arrear and mode of payment of arrear as contained in para 5 and 6
respectively of Finance Department Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 shall also be applicable in
the cases covered under this notification.

"(3) Commutation shall be allowed on the minimum pension of Rs.300 if the actual pension is less than Rs.300/-."

193
 Commutation of pension to become absolute -

(1) The commutation of pension shall become absolute in the case of an
applicant referred to—
(i) in sub-rule (1) of rule 12 on the date on which the application in Form 1 is
received by the Head of Office;

(ii) in chapter IV on the date on which the medical authority signs the medical
report in Part Ill of Form 4;

(iii) In sub-rule (3) of rule 12, on the date following the date of his retirement.

Provided that——

(a) in the case of an applicant who is drawing his pension from a treasury, the
reduction in the amount of pension on account of commutation shall be
operative from the date of receipt of the commuted value of pension or at the
end of three months after issue of authority by the Director Pension for the
payment of commuted value of pension, whichever is earlier, and

(b

a=

in the case of an applicant who is drawing pension from a branch of a
nationalised bank, the reduction in the amount of pension on account of
commutation shall be operative from the date on which the commuted value
of pension is credited by the bank to the applicant’s account to which pension
is being credited.

(०

कब

in the case of an applicant governed by sub-rule (3) of Rule 12 in whose case
the commuted value of pension becomes payable on the day following the
date of his retirement, the reduction in the amount of pension on account of
commutation shall be operative from its inception. Where, however, payment
of commuted value of pension could not be made within the first month after
the date of retirement, the reduction in the amount of pension on account of
commutation shall be operative in accordance with proviso (a) or (b), as the
case may be.

(2) In the case of an applicant referred to in Rule 9, the commuted value is paid
in two stages. The reduction in the amount of pension shall be made from the
respective dates of the payments as laid down in clause (a) or clause (b) of the
Proviso to sub-rule (1).

(3) The date on which the payment of the commuted value of pension was made
to the applicant or the commuted value was credited to the applicant's account shall
be entered in both halves of the Pension Payment Order by the disbursing authority
under intimation to the Director Pension who authorised the payment of commuted
value of pension.

Nominations -

(1) An applicant shall make a nomination in Form 5 along with the application
referred to in Rule 12 or Rule 17, as the case may be, conferring on one or more
persons the right to receive the commuted value of pension in case the applicant
dies without receiving the commuted value on or after the date on which
commutation became absolute.

(2) If there is no such nomination, or if the nomination made does not subsist, the
commuted value shall be paid to the family in the manner indicated in sub-rule (1) (b)
of Rule 56 of the Pension Rules.

(3) If in any case the commuted value cannot be paid in the manner indicated in
sub-rules (1) and (2), the same shall be paid to his heirs.

194
 8. Calculation of commuted value of pension -

The lump sum payable to an applicant shall be calculated in accordance with the
Table of the values prescribed from time to time and applicable to the applicant on the date
on which the commutation becomes absolute.

9. Retrospective revision of final pension -

An applicant who has commuted a fraction of his final pension and after commutation
his pension has been revised and enhanced retrospectively as a result of Government’s
decision, the applicant shall be paid the difference between the commuted value determined
with reference to enhanced pension and the commuted value already authorised. For the
payment of difference the applicant shall not be required to apply afresh.

195
 10.

CHAPTER III

COMMUTATION OF PENSION WITHOUT
MEDICAL EXAMINATION

Scope -

The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to an applicant who is eligible to commute

a fraction of his pension without medical examination.

11.

12.

Eligibility -

An applicant who is authorised—

(i) a superannuation pension under Rule 30 of the Pension Rules; or
(ii) a retiring pension under Rule 32 of the Pension Rules, or

(iii) a pension on absorption in or under a corporation or company or body in
terms of Rule 33 of Pension Rules and who elects to receive monthly pension
and death cum retirement gratuity; or

(iv) a compensation pension on abolition of permanent post under Rule 38 of the
Pension Rules; or

(v) a pension in whole or in part on the finalisation of the departmental or judicial
proceedings referred to in Rule 7 of the pension Rules and issue of final
orders thereon, shall, subject to the limit in Rule 5, be eligible to commute a
fraction of his pension without medical examination:

Provided that he applies for commutation of pension in Form 1 in accordance
with the provisions of Rule 12.

Application for commutation of pension -

(1) An applicant, who is in receipt of any pension referred to in Rule 11 and
desires to commute a fraction of that pension any time after the date following the
date of his retirement from service but before the expiry of one year from the date of
retirement, shall—

(a) apply to the Head of Office in Form 1, after the date of his retirement;

(b) ensure that the application in Form 1, duly completed, is delivered to the
Head of Office as early as possible but not later than one year of the date of
his retirement:

Provided that in the case of an applicant—

(a) referred to in clause (iii) of Rule 11, where order retiring him from
Government service had been issued from a retrospective date, the period of
one year referred to in this Sub-rule shall reckon from the date of issue of the
retirement orders;

(b) referred to in clause (v) of Rule 11, the period of one year referred to in this
sub-rule shall reckon from the date of the issue of the orders consequent on
the finalisation of the departmental or judicial proceedings.

(2) An applicant who applies for commutation of pension within one year of the
date of his retirement but his application in Form 1 is received by the Head of Office
after one year of the date of his retirement, shall not be eligible to get his pension
commuted, without medical examination. Such an applicant, if he desires to
commute a fraction of his pension, shall apply afresh in Form 2 in accordance with
the procedure laid down in Chapter IV.

196
 13.

14.

(3) A Government servant who is due to retire on superannuation and desires
payment of the commuted value of pension being authorised at the time of issue of
the pension payment order, shall be eligible to apply for commutation of a fraction of
pension along with pension papers prior to the date of retirement provided that—

(a) the Government servant retires on superannuation pension only;

(b) the application is submitted to the Head of Office in Form 1 along with
pension papers so as to reach the Head of Office before the date of
superannuation; and

(c) the Government shall have no liability for the payment of the commuted value
of pension if the Government servant dies before the date of superannuation
or forfeits claim to pension before such retirement.

Action to be taken by the Head of Office on application for commutation of
pension -

(1) The Head of Office on receipt of application in Form 1 under sub-rule (1) and
sub-rule (3) of Rule 12 shall—-
(a) initial the Form indicating the date of its receipt;

(b) immediately the receipt of Form 1 in Part Il of that Form and despatch the
same to the applicant;

(c) take immediate action to complete Part |॥ of Form 1 and forward the same to
the Director Pension after retaining one copy for his record.

(2) In case application in Form 1 is received by the Head of Office under sub-
rule (1) of Rule 12 after one year of the date of retirement of the applicant, the Head
of Office shall inform the applicant that—-

(a) he shall not be eligible to commute a fraction of pension without medical
examination;

(b) if he desires to get a fraction of the pension commuted, he should apply
afresh in Form 2 so that arrangements for medical examination are made in
accordance with the procedure laid down in Chapter IV.

Authorisation of commuted value by the Director Pension -

(1) The Director Pension on receipt of Form 1 from the Head of Office shall
verify that——

(a) information furnished by the Head of Office in Part III of Form 1 is correct;

(b) the applicant is eligible to commute a fraction of his pension without medical
examination;

(c) the commuted value of pension has been determined correctly by the Head
of Office.

(2) The Director Pension after necessary verification of the information furnished

in Form 1 shall——

(a) issue authority for the payment of commuted value of pension to the
disbursing authority concerned;

(b) draw the attention of the disbursing authority concerned to the proviso to
sub-rule (1) of Rule 6 so that the disbursing authority may make entry in the

Pension Payment Order regarding the date on which the amount of pension
is to be reduced on account of commuted part of pension;

197
 1.

#

(c) endorse to the applicant a copy of the authority referred to in clause (a) with
the instruction that he should collect the commuted value of pension from the
disbursing authority.

(3) (a) The Director Pension on receipt of Form 1 in respect of Government
servants who apply for commutation while in service under Rule 12
(3) from the Head of Office, shall ascertain and verify if the amount of
superannuation pension of the applicant has been calculated and if
not, take steps to finalize the amount of pension so that the pension
payment order is issued before one month of the date of retirement of
the applicant.

(b) (i) The Director, Pension after necessary verification of the
information furnished in Form-1 shall—-

™(A) issue payment authority, superscribing" not payable
before 116..................- (following the date of retirement)
to the pensioner."

(B) indicate in both the halves of the Pension Payment
Order (1) the gross pension; (2) the amount of pension
commuted; and (3) the fact that the commuted value
of pension has been authorised separately through the
disbursing authority.

(C) correspondingly reduce the monthly pension from its
inception;

(D) make a note of payment of the commuted value of
pension having been made to the retiring Government
servant in his Service Book; and

(ii) The Director, Pension shall intimate to the applicant the date

on which the Pension Payment Order has been despatched to
the disbursing authority.

The existing item "(A)" again substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/97 dated 31.7.2001.
ua) issue payment authority, superscribing ‘payable on the date of retirement of the pensioner’."

The existing item "(A)" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/97 dated 23/27.3.1999.
"(A) issue payment authority, superscribed Not payable before the......(date following the date of retirement) to the pensioner;”

198
 CHAPTER IV

COMMUTATION OF PENSION
AFTER MEDICAL EXAMINATION

15. Scope -

The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to an applicant who is eligible to commute
fraction of his pension after medical examination.

16. _ Eligibility -

An applicant who—-

(i)
(ii)

(iii)
(iv)
(v)

retires on invalid pension under Rule 35 of the Pension Rules; or

on absorption in or under a corporation or company or body corporate or
incorporate elects the alternative of receiving the death-cum-retirement
gratuity and a lump sum in lieu of pension in terms of Rule 34 of the Pension
Rules; or

is compulsorily retired from service as penalty and is granted pension under
Rule 42 of the Pension Rules; or

is in receipt of compassionate allowance under Rule 43 of the Pension Rules;
or

has retired from service on one of the pensions referred to in Rule 11 but
his application for commutation has not been received by the Head of Office
within one year of his retirement, shall be eligible to commute a fraction of his
pension subject to the limit specified in Rule 5 after he has been declared fit
by the appropriate medical authority.

17. Application for commutation of pension -

An applicant referred to in Rule 16 shall apply to the Head of Office in Form 2 for
commutation of a fraction of his pension.

18. Action to be taken by the Head of Office on application for commutation of
pension -

(1)

(2)

The Head of office on receipt of application in part | of Form 2 under Rule 17
shall

(a) acknowledge immediately the receipt of Form 2 in Part Il of that
Form and despatch the same to the applicant;

(b) forward Form 2 in original to the Director, Pension in Part Ill of that
Form with the request that Part IV of that Form may be completed
immediately and returned to him as early as possible so that action for
getting the applicant examined by the appropriate medical authority is
taken.

The Director, Pension on receipt of Form 2 from the Head of Office under
sub-rule (1)shall complete part IV of that form and transmit the same to the
Head of Office as early as possible.

199
 19.

20.

(3)

(4)

The Head of office on receipt of Form 2 from the Director, Pension
Department under sub rule(2) shall address in Form 3 the Superintendent of
Government hospital/Chief Medical Officer as the case may be where the
applicant desires to be medically examined and forward to him the following
documents:-

(i) Form 2 with Part IV of that Form duly completed in original;

(ii) two copies of the applicant's photograph of which one shall be an
attested copy;

(iii) a copy of Form 4 with a spare copy of Part III of that Form;

(iv) report or statement of the applicant's case if he has been granted
invalid pension or has previously commuted a part of his pension or
declined to accept commutation on the basis of an addition of
years to his actual age or has been refused commutation on medical
grounds.

A copy of letter in Form 3 addressed to Superintendent of
Government Hospital/Chief Medical & Health Officer as the case may be shall
be endorsed to the applicant and the Director Pension Department by the
Head of Office.

Action to be taken by the Superintendent of a Government Hospital/Chief
Medical & Health officer -

(1)

(2)

The superintendent of a Government Hospital/Chief Medical & Health Officer
on receipt of documents referred to in sub-rule (3) of rule 18 shall——-

(a) arrange as far as possible for the medical examination of the
applicant by the medical authority at the nearest available station
indicated by the applicant in Form 2;

(b) transmit the documents referred to in sub-rule(3) of rule 18 to the
medical authority with the direction to examine the applicant as
provided in rule 23;

(c) inform the applicant as to where and when he should appear for
medical examination or if necessary direct the medical authority to
communicate to the applicant the date and time of such examination.

In fixing the date of medical examination, it shall be ensured that the medical
examination is held, as far as possible, before the date of applicant’s next
birthday.

Medical Authority -

(1)

Save as otherwise provided in sub rule (2), the medical authority shall be a
medical Board, where an applicant for commutation of pension :-

(a) seeks commutation of invalid pension, or

(b) has been refused commutation on medical grounds or if he having
once declined to accept commutation on the basis of addition of years
to his actual age recommended by the medical authority, applied for a
second medical examination in accordance with the provisions of
rule 24.

In any other cases not covered by sub-rule (1) the medical authority shall be
a medical officer not lower in status than that of a Civil Surgeon or Chief
Medical Officer.

200
 21.

22.

23.

Fee for medical examination to be borne by the applicant -

The applicant shall be required to pay for medical examination such fee as may be
specified by the Government.

Failure to appear before medical authority.-

(1)

(2)

If the applicant after receipt of communication from the Superintendent of a
Government Hospital or Chief Medical & Health Officer or the medical
authority referred to in clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of rule 19 fails to appear for
medical examination before the medical authority on the date and time
communicated to him (including any change thereon either at the request of
the applicant or due to administrative reasons) and there is no reasonable
ground for his failure, the medical authority shall report the fact to the Head of
Office concerned and return to him the documents on expiry of a period of a
fortnight.

With the return of documents to the Head of Office under sub-rule (1) the
application for commutation shall be treated as having been withdrawn.

Procedure for Medical Examination -

(1)

The medical authority shall——

(a) obtain from the applicant a statement in Part | of Form 4, duly signed
by the applicant in its presence;

(b) subject the applicant to medical examination and enter the result
thereof in Part Il of Form 4;

(c) attest the unattested copy of the photograph of the applicant;
(d) complete the certificate contained in Part III of Form 4;

Provided that where —

(2)

(i) an applicant has been granted invalid pension, or
(ii) an applicant has previously commuted a part of his pension, or
(iii) an applicant has been refused commutation on medical grounds, or

(iv) an applicant had declined to accept the commutation on the
basis of addition of years to his actual age,

the medical authority shall, before completing the certificate contained
in Part Ill of Form 4, take into consideration the statement of the
medical case of the applicant.

After complying with the requirements of sub-rule (1), the medical authority
shall without delay forward to the Director, Pension who has already
completed Part IV of Form 2, the following documents, namely:—

(a) Form 2 in original,

(b) attested copy of the applicant's photograph,

(c) Form 4 in original, and

(d) a certified copy of Form 4 to the Head of Office who has
countersigned Part IV of Form 2.

The medical authority shall also send to the applicant a certified copy of Part
Ill of Form 4.

201
 24.

Second Medical Examination -

(1)

(2)

(3)

(7)

Subject to the provisions of Rule 25, the medical examination in the case of
an applicant referred to in clause(c) of sub-rule(1) of Rule 20 shall take place
after the expiry of a period of not less than one year from the date of the first
medical examination.

If the applicant desires to be re-examined on the expiry of the period
specified in sub-rule (1), the examination shall be by a Medical Board at his
own expense. For this purpose, he shall address a letter to the Head of
Office with the request that arrangements for his re-examination by a Medical
Board may be made. He shall indicate in the letter-

(i) the medical authority which examined him earlier, and the date on
which such examination took place,

(ii) the place where he was examined,

(iii) the opinion of the medical authority,

(iv) the date of birth and the date of retirement,

(v) designation of the post held at the time of retirement,

(vi) the amount of pension authorised,

(vii) the fraction of pension which was originally applied for commutation.

The Head of Office on receipt of letter under sub-rule (2) shall address the
Superintendent of a Government Hospital/Chief Medical & Health Officer for
arranging reexamination of the applicant by a Medical Board and forward the
following documents to such authority:-

(i) letter in original received from the applicant,

(ii) the certified copy of Form 4 received earlier by the Head of Office
from the medical authority under clause (d) of sub-rule (2) of rule 23

The Superintendent of a Government Hospital/Chief Medical & Health Officer
on receipt of the communication from the Head of Office under sub-rule (3)
shall inform the applicant as to where and when he should appear for
medical examination before the Medical Board or if necessary direct the
Medical Board to communicate to the applicant the place, date and time of
such examination.

The applicant after the receipt of communication under sub-rule (4) shall
appear before the Medical Board at the place and on the date and time
communicated to him.

The Medical Board shall examine the applicant and if after the examination it
is of the view that the earlier opinion of the medical authority needs no
revision or modification or needs revision or modification shall record its
opinion and communicate the same to the Head of Office under intimation to
the applicant. The documents received by the Medical Board under sub-rule
(3) shall also be returned to the Head of Office.

If as a result of the opinion of the Medical Board received by the Head of
Office under sub-rule (6), the applicant becomes eligible to commute a
fraction of pension originally applied for, the Head of Office shall determine
the commuted value with reference to the Table applicable on the date, the
Medical Board recorded its opinion. The Head of Office thereafter shall
request the “Director, Pension Department” to take further action for the
authorisation of the commuted value and forward the following documents to
him:-

202
 (8)

(i) letter in original received from the applicant under sub-rule (2),

(ii) the opinion of the Medical Board received under sub-rule (6) in
original,

(iii) calculation sheet showing the commuted value determined with
reference to the revised or modified opinion of the Medical Board.

The “Director, Pension Department” on receipt of the documents under sub-
rule (7) shall verify the correctness of the commuted value determined by the
Head of Office and thereafter take action to authorise the commuted value to
the applicant under intimation to the Head of Office.

25. Appeal against the findings of medical authority -

(1)

(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 24 an applicant referred to in
clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 20 shall be eligible for second medical
examination before the expiry of the period specified in sub rule (1) of Rule
24 if he feels that the medical authority in refusing commutation on medical
grounds or making addition of years to his actual age has committed an error
of judgment. Such an applicant may, within one month of the receipt of the
certified copy of Part IIl of Form 4, from the medical authority, prefer an
appeal by addressing a letter to the Head of Office that the opinion of the
medical authority may be got reviewed by another medical authority
mentioned in sub-rule (2) at his own expenses. He shall also indicate in the
letter-

(i) the medical authority which had examined him earlier and the date on
which the examination took place,

(ii) the place where he was examined,

(iii) the opinion of the medical authority,

(iv) the date of birth and the date of retirement,

(v) designation of the post held at the time of retirement,

(vi) the amount of pension authorised,

(vii) | the fraction of pension which was originally applied for commutation.

In case an applicant referred to in sub-rule (1)-

(i) was examined previously by a Medical Officer, not lower in status
than Civil Surgeon or a District Medical Officer, he shall be
reexamined by a Medical Board, or

(ii) was previously examined by a Medical Board, he shall be re-
examined by a second Medical Board, the members of which shall
be different from those of the first Medical Board.

The Head of Office shall, within one month of the receipt of letter under sub-
rule (1), take steps for arranging the re-examination of the applicant. For this
purpose, he shall address the Superintendent of the Government
Hospital/C.M. & H.O., where the applicant was examined previously. He
shall, while addressing the Superintendent of the Government Hospital/C.M.
& H.O., invite his attention to the provisions of sub-rule (2) and forward to it
the following documents:-

(i) letter received from the applicant in original,

(ii) certified copy of Form 4 received earlier by the Head of Office from
the Medical authority under clause (d) of sub-rule(2) of Rule 23.

203
 26.

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

The Superintendent of Govt. Hospital/CM & HO on receipt of communication
from the Head of Office under sub-rule (3) shall arrange for the second
medical examination of the applicant by a Medical Board which shall be
constituted in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (2). The
Superintendent of Govt. Hospital, Chief Medical & Health Officer shall,
thereafter, inform the applicant as to where and when he should appear for
medical examination before the Medical Board or if necessary direct the
Medical Board to communicate to the applicant the place, date and time of
such examination.

The applicant on receipt of the communication under sub-rule (4) shall
appear for the medical examination before the Medical Board on the date and
time, communicated to him.

The Medical Board shall examine the applicant and if after the examination, it
is of the view that the earlier opinion of the medical authority needs no
revision or modification or needs revision or modification shall record its
opinion and communicate the same to the Head of Office under intimation to
the applicant and the findings of the Medical Board shall be binding on the
applicant.

If the Medical Board as a result of the second medical examination of the
applicant, sets aside or modifies the opinion of the first medical authority, the
finding of the Medical Board shall be deemed to have come into force on the
date on which the first medical authority recorded its opinion and the claim of
the applicant for commutation shall be settled accordingly.

Nothing contained in this rule shall apply to an applicant in whose case the
medical authority as a result of the first medical examination had directed that
the applicant’s age for the purpose of commutation should be assumed to be
greater than his actual age, and the applicant received the commuted value
with reference to the enhanced age.

Withdrawal of application -

(1)

(2)

(3)

The applicant may after giving notice in writing, to the Head of the Office,
withdraw his application at any time before subjecting himself to medical
examination before the medical authority but in no case after he has
appeared before such authority.

In case the medical authority directs that the applicant’s age for the purpose
of commutation shall be assumed to be greater than his actual age, the
applicant may, :-

(a) by giving notice in writing to the Head of Office withdraw his
application within fourteen days from the date on which he receives
the certified copy of part Ill of Form 4 and endorse a copy of notice to
the Director, Pension, or

(b) request the Head of Office within the period specified in clause (a)
under intimation to the Director, Pension that he may be permitted to
reduce the amount of pension already applied for commutation to an
amount to be indicated by the applicant.

Where a request for withdrawal has not been made by the applicant within
the time specified in clause (a) of sub-rule (2), it shall be presumed that he
has accepted the findings of the medical authority and the Director, Pension
Department shall take action to authorise the payment of commuted value of
pension.

204
 27.

28.

(4)

(5)

If a request for reduction in the amount of pension to be commuted is made
as provided in clause (b) of sub-rule (2), the Director, Pension Department
shall authorise the payment of commuted value of pension with reference to
the reduced amount.

If the applicant is informed by the Director, Pension Department under rule
27 that on account of modification of the Table, the commuted value
becoming payable to the applicant will be less than the value communicated
to him in Form 3, it shall be open to the applicant to withdraw his application
by a written notice addressed to the Director, Pension Department and the
applicant shall endorse a copy of the notice to the Head of Office within
fourteen days of the date on which he receives intimation of such
modification.

Modification in the value specified in the Table -

(1)

(2)

In case the value specified in the Table is modified at any time before the
commutation becomes absolute in terms of clause (ii) of sub-rule (1) of rule 6,
the payment shall be made in accordance with the value so modified.

Where the commuted value calculated with reference to the Table as
modified, is less favourable than the value determined with reference to the
Table before it was so modified, the Director, Pension Department shall,

(a) inform the applicant of the revised value and communicate to him the
provisions of sub-rule (5) of rule 26, and

(b) endorse to the Head of Office a copy of the communication issued
under clause (a).

Authorisation of payment of commuted value by the Director, Pension
Department -

(1)

(2)

Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2) and sub-rule (3) of rule 26, the
Director, Pension Department on receipt of the documents referred to in
sub-rule (2) of rule 23, from the medical authority, shall without delay issue an
order to the disbursing authority concerned and furnish to it the following
particulars and documents, namely:-

(i) the amount of pension commuted, the amount of commuted value of
pension and the date on which the commutation became absolute,

(ii) the amount of residuary pension,

(iii) Form 4 in original,

(iv) copy of the applicants photograph as attested by the medical
authority.

The Director, Pension Department shall also,

(a) bring to the notice of disbursing authority the provisions of the proviso
to sub-rule (1) of rule 6 regarding the date on which the amount of
original pension should be reduced ;

(b) endorse to the applicant a copy of the order issued under sub-rule (1)
with the remarks that he should collect the commuted value from the
disbursing authority; and

(c) bring to the notice of the applicant the provisions of the proviso to sub-
rule (1) of rule 6.

205
 29.

CHAPTER V

Restoration of Commutation of Pension -

(1)

(2)

(3)

™4)

A pensioner who retired from Government service and commuted a part of
his pension subject to a maximum of 1/3rd of his original pension under
Commutation of Pension Rules, and on the date of promulgation of these
rules or thereafter has completed or will complete 14 years from the
respective dates of commutation, the commuted portion shall be restored
from the first of the month following the month in which the period of 14 years
has elapsed from the date of such commutation and shall be allowed full
pension which he would have drawn but for commutation of a portion of
pension. The restored portion of pension shall not be permitted to be
commuted again.

In cases where period of 14 years of commutation is already over before the
date of promulgation of these rules, the commuted portion shall be restored
from the date of promulgation of these rules.

Government employees who got themselves absorbed under Public Sector
Undertaking/ Autonomous Bodies & have received or opted to receive
payment of lump sum amount under Rule 34 of Pension Rules, shall not be
entitled to the benefits of sub rule (1) as they cease to be Government
Pensioners.

The concerned Treasury Officer/Pension Payment Officer shall indicate the
date of restoration of commuted pension as per provisions contained in sub
rule (1) at the time of commutation of pension in the both halves of Pension
Payment Order in the following format :-

"The amount of pension of Rs. commuted on shall
be restored from the first of the month following the month in which the period
of 14 years will elapse i.e. on provided that the pensioner himself is

alive on that date."

The existing sub-rule (4) alongwith Form No. 6 substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/97 dated 2.8.2005.

“(4)

(i) An applicant who is eligible for restoration of commutation of Pension under sub-rule (1) shall
apply to the concerned Treasury Officer/Pension Payment Officer in Form No.6.

(ii) On receipt of an application for restoration of commutation of pension from the pensioner, the
Treasury Officer/Pension Payment Officer shall ask for the ‘disburser’s half from the concerned
Bank/Sub treasury, in cases where the pensioner draws his pension from Public Sector
Bank/Sub Treasury and shall examine it and authorise full pension as a result of restoration of
commuted-value of pension and record the same on both halves of Pension Payment Order
under his seal and dated signature. The both halves of Pension Payment Order will be sent to
concerned Bank/Sub-Treasury for disbursement.

(iii) The Treasury Officer/Pension Payment Officer will inform the Director of Pension about the
restoration of commuted portion of pension for the purpose of verification and updating the
records in the Directorate of Pension.”

206
 CHAPTER - VI

MISCELLANEOUS
30. Interpretation -

Where any doubt arises as to the interpretation of these rules, it shall be referred to
the Government in the Finance Department for decision.

31. Power to relax -

Where any Department of the Government is satisfied that the operation of any of
these rules causes; undue hardship in any particular case; that department may, by order
for reasons to be recorded in writing, dispense with or relax the requirements of that rule to
such extent and subject to such exceptions and conditions, as it may consider necessary for
dealing with the case in a just and equitable manner:

Provided that no such order shall be made except with the concurrence of the
Finance Department.

32. Repeal and savings -

(1) On the commencement of these rules, every rule, regulation contained in
RCS (Commutation of Pension) Rules 1981 as amended from time to time or
order including Office Memoranda (herein after referred to in this rule as the
old rule) in force immediately before such commencement shall, in so far as it
provides for any of the matters contained in these rules, cease to operate.

(2) Notwithstanding such ceaser of operation-

(a) any application for commutation of pension which is pending before
the commencement of these rules shall be disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of old rules as if these rules had not been made;
and

(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), anything done or any action
taken under the old rules shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provision of these rules.

By order of the Governor,

DR. ADARSH KISHORE
Secretary to the Government.

207
 FORM-1
See Rule 5 (2), 6(1), 11, 12, 13, and 14

Form of application for Commutation of a fraction of Pension without medical
examination.

(To be submitted in duplicate before/after retirement but within one years of the date of
retirement)

PART-I

To,
(Here indicate the
designation and full
address of the Head
of Office)

Sub: Commutation of pension without Medical Examination.
Sir,

| desire to commute a fraction of my pension as indicated below in accordance with
the provisions of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996. This
application is being submitted before/after my retirement. The necessary particulars are
furnished below:-
1; Name (in Block letters).

2. Father’s name (also husband’s name in
the case of a female Government servant).

3. Designation at the time of retirement/
at the time of submission of application
while in service.

Name of Office/Department in which employed.
Date of birth (by Christian era)

Date of retirement/on which to retire.

N Oa -

Class of pension on which retired/
on which to retire.

8. *fraction of pension proposed to be
commuted.

* The applicant should indicate the fraction of the amount of monthly pension (subject to
a maximum of one third thereof) which he desires to commute and not the amount in
rupees.

208
 9. No. and date of the Pension Payment
Order, if issued (Not applicable
when application is made before
retirement).

10. ** Disbursing authority for payment of
Pension

(a) Treasury/Sub-Treasury(Name and
complete address of the Treasury/Sub-Treasury
to be indicated).

(b) (i) Branch of the Nationalised Bank
with complete postal address,

(ii) Bank Account No. to which monthly
pension is being credited each month.

(c) Pension Payment Officer.

Signature
Postal Address.
Place
Date

Note: The Payment of commuted value of pension shall be made through the disbursing
authority from which pension is being drawn, it is not open to an applicant to draw
the commuted value of pension from a disbursing authority other than the disbursing
authority from which pension is being drawn.

PART-II
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
ReGeived TOM Shi c.csmoercsecrnmsmrcreunmnmavnn wunmnmeneenemeanTeNET पपपतनन्वादान्पक्‍पदप्का८७
(Name) (Designation)

application in part | of Form 1 for the commutation of a fraction of pension without medical
examination.
Place Signature
Date Head of Office
Note: This acknowledgement is to be signed, stamped and dated and is to be detached

from the form and handed over to the applicant, if the form has been received by the

post, it has to be acknowledged on the same date and the acknowledgement send
under registered cover.

रू

Score out which is not applicable.

209
 PART-II

Forwarded to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur with the remarks that :-

(i) the particulars furnished by the applicant in part | have been verified
and are correct;

(ii) the applicant is eligible to get a fraction of his pension commuted
without medical examination;

(iii) the commuted value of pension determined with reference to the
Table applicable at present comes to RS................ i

(iv) the amount of residuary pension after commutation will be Rs......

2. It is requested that further action to authorise the payment of the amount of
commuted value of pension may be taken as in rule 14 of the Rajasthan Civil Services
(Commutation of Pension ) Rules, 1996.

3. The receipt of Part | of the Form has been acknowledged in part II which has
been forwarded separately to the applicant 0ा............................-.- .

Signature
Head of Office
Place:
Date :

210
 FORM-2
See rules 5(2),12(2),13(2),17,18(1),(2)and(3),19(1)and 22(2)
Form of Application for Commutation of Pension after Medical Examination by An
Applicant referred to in Rule 16 of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Commutation of

Pension) Rules, 1996.

(To be submitted in duplicate)

PART I
Space for photograph
To,
(Here indicate the designation
and full address of the Head
of Office)
Sub: Commutation of pension after Medical Examination.
Sir,

| desire to commute a fraction of my pension in accordance with the provisions of the
Rajasthan Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996. An attested copy of my
photograph is pasted on the application and an unattested copy is enclosed. The necessary
particulars are furnished below :-

1. Name (in Block letters)

2. Father’s name (and also husband’s name in
the case of a female Government servant).

3. Designation.

4. Name of Office/Department in which employed.

5. Date of birth (by Christian era).

6. Date of retirement.

7. Class of pension on which retired (see Chapter III)
of the Rajasthan Civil Service (Pension) Rules, 1996.

8. Amount of pension authorised.

9. *Fraction of pension proposed to be commuted.

10. No. and date of the Pension Payment Order.

11. ** Disbursing authority for payment of pension

(a) Treasury /Sub-Treasury (Name and complete
address of the Treasury /Sub-Treasury to be
indicated).

211
 Place
Date

(b) (i) Branch of the National Bank with
complete postal address.

(ii) Bank Account No. to which monthly
pension is being credited each month .

(c) Pension Payment Officer.

12. Approximate date from which commutation is
desired to have effect.

13. The amount of pension already commuted, if any.

14. Preference for station where medical examination is
desired to take place.

Signature

Postal 3401855....... .........

**

The applicant should indicate the fraction of the amount of monthly pension (subject to
a maximum of one-third thereof) which he desires to commute and not the amount of
rupees.

Score out which is not applicable.

Note:- The payment of commuted value of pension shall be made through the disbursing

authority from which pension is being drawn. It is not open to an applicant to
draw the commuted value of pension from a disbursing authority other than the
authority from which pension is being drawn.

PART-II

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Received from SHV ............................-.----------- ">> >> >> >> >>>>>त००>5०59 ५9५५
(Name) (designation)

Application in part | of Form 2 for commutation of a fraction of pension after medical

examination.
Place Signatures: ..................-
Date Head of Office

212
 PART-II

Forwarded to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur with the remarks
that the particulars furnished by the applicant in part | have been verified and are correct
and the applicant is eligible to get a fraction of his pension commuted after medical

examination.

2. It is requested that part IV of the Form may be completed and returned to this

Office as early as possible.

Place

Date

ak की वो >

शाक्षाद्ापा8..... ..........---५-----

Head of Office

PART-IV

(To be completed by the Director, Pension Department)

Name of the applicant.

Date of birth (by Christian era).
Date Of retirement.

Amount of pension.

Class of pension (see Chapter III of the
Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996)

Amount of Pension desired to be commuted.

On the basis of

Normal Added Years
age ———___-
1Yr. 2015.
Rs. Rs. Rs.

(i) Sum payable if commutation becomes
absolute before the applicant’s next birth
day, which falls on............

(ii) Sum payable if commutation becomes
absolute after the applicant’s next
birth day which falls on........

The Head of Account to which the commuted
value is debitable.

number of enclosures, if any (see note below).

213
 Note:- The Director, Pension Department Rajasthan, Jaipur should enclose with the Form

Place

Date

a copy of the report or statement of the applicant's case if the applicant has been
granted invalid pension or has previously commuted a part of his pension or declined
to accept commutation on the basis of an addition of years to actual age, or has
been refused commutation on medical grounds.

Signature of the Director,
Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.

Countersigned

(Head of Office)

Full Address.

214
 FORM-3
(See rule 20(3) and (4) and 23(5) )

Form of Letter to the Superintendent of a Government Hospital/
Chief Medical & Health Officer.

No.
Government of Rajasthan
tiiteseteeeeeeeee (Department)
Dated the ........................-
To,
Sub:- Medical Examination-Commutation of Pension
Sir,
जां.....................---.-----------०--------०---०---- who retired from service 01............. AS .........

(Designation) has applied for commuting a fraction of his pension for a lump sum payment.
The following documents are forwarded herewith:-

(a) Application in Form 2 in original together with:-
(i) An unattested copy of the applicant’s photograph,

(ii) Part IV of Form 2 in original duly completed by the
Director, Pension Department Rajasthan, Jaipur.

cS
=

A copy of Form 4 with a spare copy of Part IIl of that Form.

eS
se

Report of the statement of the applicant’s case if he has been granted invalid
pension or has previously commuted a fraction of his pension or declined to
accept commutation on the basis of addition of years to his actual age or has
been refused commutation on medical grounds.

2. In terms of rule 20 of the Rajasthan Civil Service (Commutation of Pension) Rules,

1 21 25111 should be examined by a Medical Board/Medical
Officer not lower than the rank of Civil Surgeon or a Chief Medical Officer. It is requested
that arrangement may be made to get श9....................----------०--------- examined as

expeditiously as possible before his next birth day which falls 0........................-

3. It is requested that arrangements for medical examination by the medical authority
indicated in para 2 above may be made at the nearest available station mentioned by
जां.....................-...---- ceeeeseeeeseeeeeeeeeeesseeeseneeeseeeess in his application in Form 2. The attention
of the Medical authority may be drawn to the provisions of rule 23 of the Rajasthan Civil
Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996.

4. It is requested that 391,.................------०-०-०००-०००००००००००००००००-- may be informed direct
under intimation to this Department/Office as to where and when he should appear before
the appropriate authority for medical examination. A Copy of this letter is being endorsed to
him so that he may comply with your instructions on hearing from you.

215
 5. The receipt of this letter may please be acknowledged.

Yours faithfully,
(Head of Office)

Copy forwarded to SHri.. .........................------------------०-----०--- (here give complete postal
address) with the remarks that subject to the medical authority recommending commutation,
he will on the basis of the report of the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur,
be eligible for the lumpsum payment in lieu of the amount of pension to be commuted as
follows:-

On the basis of

Normal Added Years
age ———_—__-

Rs. Rs. Rs.

(i) Sum payable if commutation becomes
absolute before the applicant’s next birth-
day which falls 0... ...................--------०---०-०---

(ii) Sum payable if commutation becomes
absolute after applicant’s next birth day which
fALSION vwessnseveeceseermmnoneveccrowmeveneen

The Table of the present value, on the basis of which the calculation by the “Director,
Pension Department’, Rajasthan, Jaipur has been made, is subject to alteration at any time
without notice and consequently the basis are liable to revision before payment is made.
The sum payable will be the sum appropriate to the applicant’s age on his birth day next
after the date on which the commutation becomes absolute or if the medical authority directs
that years will be added to that age, to the consequent assumed age.

जाएं... ...............-----------०-----०--०-०---०------ should report for medical examination to the
medical authority direct on hearing गी0ा...........................--- He should take with him the
enclosed Form 4 with the particulars required in Part | completed except the signature or
thumb or finger impressions.

Place Signature
Date Head of Office

Copy forwarded to the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur with
reference to his letter 1ध106/.........................---------------- dated

Signature
Head of Office

216
 FORM-4
See Rule 6(1), 18(3), 23(1), (2) and (3), 24(3), 26(2) & 28(1)
Medical Examination by the .............--------

(here enter the medical authority)

PART-I

The applicant must complete this statement prior to his examination by the.......... and
must sign the declaration

(here enter the medical authority)

appended thereto in the presence of that authority.

Peon. >

Name of the applicant (in Block letters).
Date of birth (by Christian era).
Place of birth.

Particulars regarding parents, brothers and sisters:-

Father’s age Father’s age Number of brothers Number of
If living & at death and living, their ages brothers dead,
state of cause of & state of health their ages at
health death death & cause
of death
1 2 3 4
Mother’s age Mother’s age Number of sisters Number of
If living & at death and living, their ages sisters dead,
state of cause of & state of their ages at
health death health death & cause
of death
5 6 7 8
5. Have you ever been examined,
(a) for Life Insurance, or/and
(b) by any Government Medical Officer or Medical Board.
6. Have you been granted or considered for grant of invalid pension ? If so,

state the ground thereof.

217
 7. Have you ever been granted leave on medical certificate during the last five
years ? If so, state periods of leave and nature of illness.

8. Have you ever-

(a)

Had small-pox, intermittent or any other fever, enlargement on
suppuration of glands, spitting of blood, asthma, inflammation of
lungs, pleurisy, heart disease, fainting attacks, rheumatism
appendicitis, epilepsy, insanity, or other nervous disease, discharge
from or other disease of the ear, syphilis or gonorrhea; or

(b) had any other disease or injury which required confinement to bed, or

(c) undergone any surgical operation, or

(d) suffered from any illness, wound or injury sustained while on active
service.

(e) Presence of albument or sugar in urine

9. Present state of health

(a) Have you a hernia?

(b) Have you varicocele, varicose vein or piles?

(c) Is your vision in each eye good (with or without glasses)?

(d) Is your hearing in each ear good ?

(e) Have you any congenital or acquired malformation,
defect or deformity ?

(f) Have you lost or gained weight markedly
during the last three years?

(g) Have you been under treatment of any doctor

within the last three months and nature of
illness for which such treatment was taken ?

Declaration by applicant

(To be signed in the presence of the medical authority)

| declare all the above answers to be, to the best of my belief, true and correct.

| am fully aware that by wilfully making a false statement or concealing a relevant
fact, | shall incur the risk of losing the commutation. | have applied for and of having my
pension with held or withdrawn under rule 6 of the Rajasthan Civil Service (Pension) Rules,

1996.

Signed in presence of.

Applicant’s signature or thumb
impression in case of illiterate applicant.

GSAS कल and designation of medical authority.

218
 af WON =

10.

PART-II
(To be filled in by the examining medical authority)

Apparent age

Height

Weight

Describe any scars or identifying marks of the applicant.
Pulse rate.

(a) sitting

(b) standing

What is the character of pulse ?

Blood Pressure-

(a) Systolic
(b) Diastolic
Is there any evidence of disease of the main organs ?
(a) Heart
(b) Lungs
(c) Liver
(d) Spleen
(e) Kidney
Investigations-
(i) Urine
(State specific gravity)
(ii) Blood
(iii) X-ray Chest
(iv) E.C.G.

Has the applicant a hernia ?
If so, state the kind and if reducible.

Any additional finding.

219
 PART-II
We have carefully examined Shri/Smt./Kumari and am/are of opinion that-
He/She is in good bodily health and has the prospect of an average duration of life.
OR

He/She is not in good bodily health and is not a fit subject for commutation.

OR
Although he/she is suffering ग0.............................-.--------------"">-""___+-"-+"०-- he/she is
considered a fit subject for commutation but his/her age for the purpose of commutation i.e.
the age next birth day should be taken to 06.. ....................---------- (in words) years more than
his/ her actual age.
Station: Signature and designation of
Date: examining medical authority.

220
 FORM 5
(See Rule 7)
To,

Head Of Office
(71808 8) «व वसससससससतन कक स न 993 नस नननतन कस दब रब 9

|,.................--------०-०-०००-००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००-०००-- hereby
(Name of the pensioner in capital letters)

nominate the person named below, under Rule 7 of the Rajasthan Civil Services
(Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996

Name and Relationship If nominee is minor
address of with the
४ है Date Name and address of
the nominee pensioner :
of person who may receive
birth the said commuted value
during the nominee’s minority
1 2 3 4
Name and Relationship Date of Name and Contingency on
address of other with birth if the address of happening of
nominee incase pensioner other nominee person who may which
the nominee is minor receive the nomination shall
under column (1) commuted value become
predeceases the of pension invalid
pensioner during the other
nominee’s
minority
5 6 7 8 9

Signature (or thumb-impression

if illiterate) and name of Pensioner.

Witness: Signature: Address :
Name & Address : Signature of Head of Office
STAMP

221
 Acknowledgement to be sent by the Head of Office

Certified that the nomination has been received from....
TT ere (Name of Pensioner) whose address is

Signature of Head of Office

222
 FORM NO. 6
APPLICATION FOR RESTORATION OF COMMUTATION OF PENSION
(See Rule 29)
(to be submitted by Pensioner to PPO/TO)
To

The Pension Payment Officer/T.O.

Subject:- Restoration of Commutation of Pension.

Sir,

| apply for restoration of commuted value of pension on completion of 14 year from
the date of commutation as required by Rule 29 of the Rajasthan Civil Services

(Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996. The required particulars are given below:-

1. (i) Name of pensioner with
father’s name.
(ii) Present address.
2. Name of Department & Post
last held.
3. Date of retirement and class
of pension on which retired.
4. (i) Age on the date of retirement.
(ii) Date of commutation.
(iii) Date from which restoration
is required.

5. P.P.O.No.
(Pensioners portion of P.P.O.
enclosed in original).

6. Original amount of pension
sanctioned.
7. Amount of pension commuted.

8. Name of Treasury/Sub. Treasury/Bank
from which the pension is being drawn.

| Certify that the particulars given above are correct.

Yours faithfully,

Note: Form No. 6 substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(4)FD(Rules)/97 dated 02.08.2005

(Reference Rule 29(4).

223
 TABLE
See rules 8,24 (7), 26(5) and 27(1) and (2)

Commutation values, for a pension of Re.1 per annum.

Age next Commutation value Age next Commutation value
birth day. expressed as number birth day. expressed as number
of years purchase. of years purchase.

1 2 1 2
17 19.28 52 12.66
18 19.20 53 12.35
19 19.11 54 12.05
20 19.01 55 11.73
21 18.91 56 11.42
22 18.81 57 11.10
23 18.70 58 10.78
24 18.59 59 10.46
25 18.47 60 10.13
26 18.34 61 9.81
27 18.21 62 9.48
28 18.07 63 9.15
29 17.93 64 8.82
30 17.78 65 8.50
31 17.62 66 8.17
32 17.46 67 7.85
33 17.29 68 7.53
34 17.11 69 7.22
35 16.92 70 6.91
36 16.72 71 6.60
37 16.52 72 6.30
38 16.31 73 6.01
39 16.09 74 5.72
40 15.87 75 5.44
41 15.64 76 5.17
42 15.40 77 4.90
43 15.15 78 4.65
44 14.90 79 4.40
45 14.64 80 4.17
46 14.37 81 3.94
47 14.10 82 3.72
48 13.82 83 3.52
49 13.54 84 3.32
50 13.25 85 3.13
51 12.95

224
 APPENDIX II
THE RAJASTHAN PENSIONS ACT, 1958.
(Act No. 27 of 1958)
(Received the assent of the Governor on the 221 day of May, 1958.) An Act to
consolidate and amend the law relating to State pensions and grants of money made or

payable by the State Government. BE it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the
Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows : -

1. Short title, extent and commencement.-
(1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Pension Act, 1958.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. Definitions.-

In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires,—

(i) “grant of money” includes any amount payable on the part of the State
Government in respect of any right, privilege, perquisite or office, but does
not include a cash jagir to which the Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act,
1958, applies;

(ii) ”*State” or “State of Rajasthan” means the new State of Rajasthan as formed
by section 10 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (Control Act, 37 of
1956).
3: Bar of suits relating to pensions and grants. -

No civil court shall, except as hereinafter provided, entertain any suit relating to any
pension or grant of money conferred or made by the State Government or by any of its
predecessor Governments, whatever may have been the consideration for such pension or
grant and whatever may have been the nature of the payment, claim or right for which such
pension or grant may have been substituted.

4. Claims to be made to Collector or other authorised officer.-

Any person having a claim relating to any such pension or grant may prefer such
claim to the Collector of the district or other officer authorised in this behalf by the State
Government; and such Collector or other officer shall dispose of such claim in accordance
with such rules as the State Government may from time to time prescribe in this behalf.

5. When civil court competent to take cognizance of such claims.-

A civil court, otherwise competent to try the same, shall take cognizance of any
such claim upon receiving a certificate from the Collector of the district, or other officer
authorised in that behalf by the State Government, to the effect that the case may be so
tried but shall not make any order or decree in any suit whatever, by which the liability of the
State Government to pay any such pension or grant as aforesaid is affected directly or
indirectly.

6. Mode of payment.-

All State pensions or grants of money shall be paid by the Collector or other officer
authorised by the State Government in this behalf, subject to such rules as may, from time
to time be made by the State Government.

225
 7. Commutation of pensions and grants.-

The State Government may, with the consent of the holder, order the whole or any
part of his pension or grant of money to be commuted for a lump sum on such terms as may
deem fit.

8. Exemption of pension from attachment.-

No pension granted or continued by the State Government on political considerations
or on account of past services or present infirmities or as a compassionate allowance, and
no money due or to become due on account of any such pension or allowance, shall be
liable to seizure, attachment or sequestration by process of any court in the State at the
instance of a creditor, for any demand against the pensioner, or in satisfaction of a decree or
order of any such court.

9. Assignments etc. in anticipation of pension to be void.-

All assignments, agreements, orders, sales and securities of every kind made by the
person entitled to any pension or allowance mentioned in section 8 in respect of any money
not payable at or before the making thereof on account of such pension or allowance, or for
giving or assigning any future interest therein are null and void.

*[9-A. Recovery of established Government dues from out of pension -

Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 8 and 9, the amounts of all
established. Government dues outstanding at the date of his retirement from Government
service, if any, against a person in receipt of any pension or grant of money or allowance or
entitled to receive a lump sum in lieu thereof under section 7 shall be charged upon such
pension, grant, allowance or lump sum, as the case may be , and the State Government
shall be competent to recover therefrom the amounts of such dues without having recourse
to any legal action in respect thereof.

Explanation-The expression “Government dues” includes.—

(i) arrears of any Central or State tax deductible under the law at source from
out of the pay of a Government servant while in service,

(ii) over-issues of pay, allowances or leave salary to a Government officer in
respect of any period of his service before retirement,

(iii) accumulated arrears of rent in respect of house accommodation provided by
Government to a Government servant during any period of his service and
dues on account of any repair carried on, alteration or addition made, service
rendered or amenity provided to such house accommodation, and

(iv) balance of any advance granted to the Government servant during the
period of his service, remaining unpaid at the date of his retirement, together
with interest, if any, chargeable thereon.]

10. Reward to informers.-

Whoever proves to the satisfaction of the State Government that any State pension
or grant of money is fraudulently or unduly received by the person enjoying the benefit
thereof shall be entitled to a reward equivalent to the amount of such pension or grant for a
period of six months.

*

Inserted vide section 2 of Rajasthan Act No. 31 of 1960, published in Rajasthan
Gazette, Part IV-A Extraordinary, Dated 24.09.1960.

226
 11. Power to make rules.-

(1) The State Government may, from time to time, make rules consistent with this Act
respecting all or any of the following matters, namely : —

(a)

The places and times at which, and the persons to whom, any State pension
or grant of money shall be paid;

inquiries into the identity of claimants;

records to be kept on the subject of State pensions and grants of money;
transmission of such records;

correction of such records;

delivery of certificates to pensioners and grantees of money;

registers of such certificates;

reference to the civil court under section 5 of persons claiming a right of
succession to, or participation in, State pensions or grants of money made or
payable by the State Government; and

generally for the guidance of officers under this Act and for carrying out the
purposes thereof.

(2) All such rules shall be published in the official Gazette and shall thereupon have
the force of law.

227
 APPENDIX-III

GRANT OF DEARNESS RELIEF TO STATE GOVERNMENT
PENSIONERS.

(1) *The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order No. F.1(25) FD(Gr.2)/93 dated 1-11-1995 to
State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid and
compensation pension shall be revised with effect from 1-1-1996 as follows: -

Pension per month Revised Rates of Dearness
Relief per month.

(i) Not exceeding Rs.1750/- 148% of pension.

(ii) Exceeding Rs.1750/- but not 111% of pension subject to a
exceeding Rs.3000/- minimum of Rs.2590/-

(iii) Exceeding. Rs.3000/- 96% of pension subject to a

minimum of Rs.3330/-

2. The term ‘pension’ for the aforesaid purpose shall mean:-

(a) in respect of employees retired/retiring on or after 1-9-1986, the original
pension (inclusive of commuted portion of pension);

(b) in respect of employees who retired on or after 31-3-1986 but prior to 1-9-
1986, original pension/revised pension (inclusive of commuted portion of
pension) plus increase in pension admissible thereon in terms of Finance
Department Order No. F.1(44)FD(Gr.2)/82, dated 1-4-1986;

(c) in respect of employees who retired prior to 31-3-1986, ‘Consolidated
pension’ as defined in paragraph 7 of Finance Department Order No.
F.1(47)FD(Gr.2)/88, dated 2-12-1989;

(d) in respect of pensioners getting minimum pension / family pension, the
minimum pension/family pension i. e. Rs. 300/- per month.

3. The amount of Dearness Relief involving fraction of a rupee shall be rounded off to
the next higher rupee.

4. A ready reckoner showing the dearness relief payable from 1-1-1996 onwards in
terms of these orders is enclosed.

5 Provisions contained in this Department Memorandum No. F.1(36)FD(Gr.2)/87
dated 10-8-1988 and 23-12-1992 will remain unchanged

6. This order shall also apply to following categories of Pensioners-

(i) Pensioners in receipt of family pension under Chapter XXIll, XXIII A and
Extraordinary pension under Chapter XXIV of the Rajasthan Service Rules.

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.1(25)FD(Gr.2)/93 dated 7.5.1996.

228
 (ii) Pensioners who were employees of the former State of Ajmer, Bombay &
Madhya Bharat and opted for pension rules applicable to them immediately
before 1-11-1956 in terms of Rule 11 of the Rajasthan Service (Protection of
service conditions) Rules, 1957 and are in receipt of superannuation, retiring,
invalid, compensation, injury and family pension under the aforesaid rules.

(iii) Pensioners who are in receipt of pension sanctioned under the Ajmer
Abolition of Intermediaries and Land Reforms (Pension to Intermediaries
Employees) Rules,1962.

(iv) Jagir Pensioners who are drawing pension under Section 28 of the
Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagirs Act, 1952 read with
Revenue Department Order No. F.4(361)Revenue/A/54, dated 31-3-1955
and Rule 10 of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Jagirs Resumption
(Absorption of Jagir Employees) Rules, 1954.

7. This order shall also apply to the widows getting ex-gratia payment in accordance
with the provisions contained in Finance Department order No. F.1(35)FD(Gr.2)/87, dated 2-
7-1991 and 2-7-1992.

8. This order shall not be applicable to the Old Age Pensions, Political Pensions or any
other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the service rendered under
Government.

9. Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to Pensioners
who retired from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad and whose Pension Payment
Orders have been issued by the Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.

229
 READY RECKONER

Amount of ‘Dearness Relief sanctioned to Pensioner’s with effect from 1-1-1996 vide
Government Order No.F.1(25)FD(Gr.2)/93 dated 7th May, 1996.

PART-I

(Applicable where pension is upto Rs. 1750/- Dearness Relief 148% of pension)

Amount of Dearness relief on Amount of Dearness relief on
Pension in multiple of rupees Pension in fraction of rupees hundred
hundred
Amount of Amount of Amount of | Amount of Amount of Amount of
Pension Dearness pensionin Dearness pension in Dearness
Relief fraction of Relief fraction of Relief
rupees rupees
hundred hundred
1 2 3 4 5 6
300 444 1 2 21 32
400 592 2 3 22 33
500 740 3 5 23 35
600 888 4 6 24 36
700 1036 5 8 25 37
800 1184 6 9 26 39
900 1332 7 11 27 40
1000 1480 8 12 28 42
1100 1628 9 14 29 43
1200 1776 10 15 30 45
1300 1924 11 17 31 46
1400 2072 12 18 32 48
1500 2220 13 20 33 49
1600 2368 14 21 34 51
1700 2516 15 23 35 52
16 24 36 54
17 26 37 55
18 27 38 57
19 29 39 58
20 30 40 60

230
 3 4 5 6
41 61 70 104
42 63 71 106
43 64 72 107
44 66 73 109
45 67 74 110
46 69 15 111
47 70 76 113
48 72 77 114
49 73 78 116
50 74 79 117
51 76 80 119
52 77 81 120
53 79 82 122

83 123

54 80 84 125
55 82 85 126
56 83 86 128
57 85 87 129
58 86 88 131
59 88 89 132
60 89 90 134
61 91 91 135
62 92 92 137
63 94 93 138
64 95 94 140
65 97 95 141
66 98 96 143
67 100 छा 144
68 101 98 146
69 103 99 147

231
 PART-II

(Applicable where pension is upto Rs. 1751/- to 3000/- Dearness Relief 111% of pension)

Amount of Amount of Amount of Dearness relief on
pension Dearness Pension in fraction of rupees hundred
inclusive of a__ Relief Amount of | Amount of Amount of Amount of
fraction of pensionin Dearness pension in Dearness
rupees fraction of Relief fraction of Relief
hundred rupees rupees
hundred hundred
1 2 3 4 5 6
1751-2333 2590 1 2 27 30
2334 2591 2 3 28 32
2335 2592 3 4 29 33
2336 2593 4 5 30 34
2337 2595 5 6 31 35
2338 2596 6 7 32 36
2339 2597 7 8 33 37
2340 2598 8 9 34 38
2341 2599 9 10 35 39
2342 2600 10 12 36 40
2343 2601 11 13 37 42
2344 2602 12 14 38 43
2345 2603 13 15 39 44
2346 2605 14 16 40 45
2347 2606 15 17 41 46
2348 2607 16 18 42 47
2349 2608 17 19 43 48
2350 2609 18 20 44 49
2351 2610 19 22 45 50
2352 2611 20 23 46 52
2353 2612 21 24 47 53
2354 2613 22 25 48 54
2355 2615 23 26 49 55
2356 2616 24 27 50 56
2357 2617 25 28 51 57
2358 2618 26 29 52 58

232
 1 2 3 4 5 6
2359 2619 53 59 77 86
2360 2620 54 60 78 87
2361 2621 55 62 79 88
2362 2622 56 63 80 89
2363 2623 57 64 81 90
2364 2625 58 65 82 92
2365 2626 59 66 83 93
2366 2627 60 67 84 94
2367 2628 61 68 85 95
2368 2629 62 69 86 96
2369 2630 63 70 87 97
2370 2631 64 72 88 98
2371 2632 65 73 89 99
2372 2633 66 74 90 100
2373 2635 67 75 91 102
2374 2636 68 76 92 103
2375 2637 69 77 93 104
2376 2638 70 78 94 105
2377 2639 71 79 95 106
2378 2640 72 80 96 107
2379 2641 73 82 97 108
2380 2642 74 83 98 109
2381 2643 75 84 99 110
2382 2645 76 85
2383 2646
2384 2647
2385 2648
2386 2649
2387 2650
2388 2651
2389 2652
2390 2653
2391 2655
2392 2656
2393 2657
2394 2658

233
 1 2 3

2395 2659
2396 2660
2397 2661
2398 2662
2399 2663

Amount of Dearness Relief
on Pension in multiple of
rupees hundred

Amount of Amount of
pension Dearness
Relief

2400 2664
2500 2775
2600 2886
2700 2997
2800 3108
2900 3219
3000 3330

234
 PART-II

(Applicable where pension exceeding Rs. 3000/- Dearness Relief 96% of pension)

Amount of Amount of Amount of Dearness relief on
pension Dearness Pension in fraction of rupees hundred
inclusive of a__ Relief Amount of | Amount of Amount of Amount of
fraction of pensionin Dearness pension in Dearness
rupees fraction of Relief fraction of Relief
hundred rupees rupees
hundred hundred
1 2 3 4 5 6
3001-3468 3330 1 1 27 26
3469 3331 2 2 28 27
3470 3332 3 3 29 28
3471 3333 4 4 30 29
3472 3334 5 5 31 30
3473 3335 6 6 32 31
3474-3475 3336 7 7 33 32
3476 3337 8 8 34 33
3477 3338 9 9 35 34
3478 3339 10 10 36 35
3479 3340 11 11 37 36
3480 3341 12 12 38 37
3481 3342 13 13 39 38
3482 3343 14 14 40 39
3483 3344 15 15 41 40
3484 3345 16 16 42 41
3485 3346 17 17 43 42
3486 3347 18 18 44 43
3487 3348 19 19 45 44
3488 3349 20 20 46 45
3489 3350 21 21 47 46
3490 3351 22 22 48 47
3491 3352 23 23 49 48
3492 3353 24 24 50 48
3493 3354 25 24 51 49
3494 3355 26 25 52 50

235
 1 2 3 4 5 6

3495 3356 53 51 tf 74
3496 3357 54 52 78 75
3497 3358 55 53 79 76
3498 3359 56 54 80 77
3499 3360 57 55 81 78
Amount of Dearness 58 56 82 79
Relief on Pension 59 57 83 80
in multiple 60 58 84 81
of rupees 61 59 85 82
hundred 62 60 86 83
Amount of Amount of 63 61 87 84
pension Dearness 64 62 88 85
Relief 65 63 89 86
66 64 90 87
3500 3360 67 65 91 88
3600 3456 68 66 92 89
3700 3552 69 67 93 90
3800 3648 70 68 94 91
71 69 95 92
72 70 96 93
73 71 97 94
74 72 98 95
75 72 99 96

76 73

Note : Where the amount of pension includes a fraction of rupees hundred, the amount of
dearness relief applicable thereto may be arrived at by adding the amount of
dearness relief on pension in multiple of rupees hundred and the amount of dearness
relief on the fraction of rupees hundred.

236
 (Il) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order No. F.1(25) FD(Gr.2)/93 dated 7-5-1996 to State
Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid and
compensation pension shall be revised with effect from 1-7-1996 as follows: -

Pension per month Revised Rates of Dearness Relief per month
(i) Not exceeding Rs.1750/- 159% of pension.
(ii) Exceeding Rs.1750/- but not 119% of pension subject to a
exceeding Rs.3000/- minimum of Rs.2783/-.
(iii) Exceeding. Rs.3000/- 103% of pension subject to a
minimum of Rs.3570/-.
2. The term ‘pension’ for the aforesaid purpose shall mean:-
(a) in respect of employees retired/retiring on or after 1-9-1986, the original

pension (inclusive of commuted portion of pension);

(b) in respect of employees who retired on or after 31-3-1986 but prior to 1-9-
1986, original pension/revised pension (inclusive of commuted portion of
pension) plus increase in pension admissible thereon in terms of Finance
Department Order No. F.1(44)FD(Gr.2)/82, dated 1-4-1986;

(c) in respect of employees who retired prior to 31-3-1986, ‘Consolidated
pension’ as defined in paragraph 7 of Finance Department Order No.
F.1(47)FD(Gr.2)/88, dated 2-12-1989;

(d) ॥ respect of pensioners getting minimum pension / family pension, the
minimum pension/family pension i. e. Rs. 300/- per month.

3: The amount of Dearness Relief involving fraction of a rupee shall be rounded off to
the next higher rupee.

4. A ready reckoner showing the dearness relief payable from 1-7-1996 onwards in
terms of these orders is enclosed.

5 Provisions contained in this Department Memorandum No. F.1(36)FD(Gr.2)/87
dated 10-8-1988 and 23-12-1992 will remain unchanged

6. This order shall also apply to following categories of pensioners-

(i) Pensioners in receipt of family pension under Chapter XXIII, XXIII A and
Extraordinary pension under Chapter XXIV of the Rajasthan Service Rules.

(ii) Pensioners who were employees of the former State of Ajmer, Bombay &
Madhya Bharat and opted for pension rules applicable to them immediately
before 1-11-1956 in terms of Rule 11 of the Rajasthan Service (Protection of
service conditions) Rules, 1957 and are in receipt of superannuation, retiring,
invalid, compensation, injury and family pension under the aforesaid rules.

(iii) Pensioners who are in receipt of pension sanctioned under the Ajmer
Abolition of Intermediaries and Land Reforms (Pension to Intermediaries
Employees) Rules, 1962.

Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.1(25)FD(Gr.2)/93 dated 25.10.1996.

237

 (iv) Jagir Pensioners who are drawing pension under Section 28 of the
Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagirs Act, 1952 read with
Revenue Department Order No. F.4(361)Revenue/A/54, dated 31-3-1955
and Rule 10 of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Jagirs Resumption
(Absorption of Jagir Employees) Rules, 1954.

iz This order shall also apply to the widows getting ex-gratia payment in accordance
with the provisions contained in Finance Department order No. F.1(35)FD(Gr.2)/87, dated 2-
7-1991 and 2-7-1992.

8. This order shall also be applicable to the pensioner/ family pensioner who are in
receipt of provisional pension.

9. This order shall not be applicable to the Old Age Pensions, Political Pensions or any
other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the service rendered under
Government.

10. Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to Pensioners
who retired from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad and whose Pension Payment
Orders have been issued by the Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension
Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.”

238
 (Ill) | *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order No. F.1(25) FD(Gr.2)/93 dated 25-10-1996 to
State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid and
compensation pension shall be revised with effect from 1-1-1997 as follows: -

Pension per month Revised Rates of Dearness Relief per month
(i) Not exceeding Rs.1750/- 170% of pension.
(ii) Exceeding Rs.1750/- but not 128% of pension subject to a
exceeding Rs.3000/- minimum of Rs.2975/-.
(iii) Exceeding. Rs.3000/- 110% of pension subject to a
minimum of Rs.3840/-.
2. The term ‘pension’ for the aforesaid purpose shall mean:-
(a) in respect of employees retired/retiring on or after 1-9-1986, the original

pension (inclusive of commuted portion of pension);

(b) in respect of employees who retired on or after 31-3-1986 but prior to
1-9-1986, original pension/revised pension (inclusive of commuted portion of
pension) plus increase in pension admissible thereon in terms of Finance
Department Order No. F.1(44)FD(Gr.2)/82, dated 1-4-1986;

(c) in respect of employees who retired prior to 31-3-1986, ‘Consolidated
pension’ as defined in paragraph 7 of Finance Department Order No.
F.1(47)FD(Gr.2)/88, dated 2-12-1989;

(d) in respect of pensioners getting minimum pension / family pension, the
minimum pension/family pension i. e. Rs. 300/- per month.

3. The amount of Dearness Relief involving fraction of a rupee shall be rounded off to
the next higher rupee.

4. A ready reckoner showing the dearness relief payable from 1-1-1997 onwards in
terms of these orders is enclosed.

5. Provisions contained in this Department Memorandum No. F.1(36)FD(Gr.2)/87,
dated 10-8-1988 and 23-12-1992 will remain unchanged.

6. This order shall also apply to following categories of pensioners-

(i) Pensioners in receipt of family pension under Chapter XXIll, XXIII A and
Extraordinary pension under Chapter XXIV of the Rajasthan Service Rules.

(ii) Pensioners who were employees of the former State of Ajmer, Bombay &
Madhya Bharat and opted for pension rules applicable to them immediately
before 1-11-1956 in terms of Rule 11 of the Rajasthan Service (Protection of
service conditions) Rules, 1957 and are in receipt of superannuation, retiring,
invalid, compensation, injury and family pension under the aforesaid rules.

(iii) Pensioners who are in receipt of pension sanctioned under the Ajmer
Abolition of Intermediaries and Land Reforms (Pension to Intermediaries
Employees) Rules, 1962.

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.1(25)FD(Rules)/93 dated 1.5.1997.

239

 10.

(iv) Jagir Pensioners who are drawing pension under Section 28 of the
Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagirs Act, 1952 read with
Revenue Department Order No. F.4(361)Revenue/A/54, dated 31-3-1955
and Rule 10 of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Jagirs Resumption
(Absorption of Jagir Employees) Rules, 1954.

This order shall also apply to the widows getting ex-gratia payment in accordance
with the provisions contained in Finance Department order No. F.1(35)FD(Gr.2)/87,
dated 2-7-1991 and 2-7-1992.

This order shall also be applicable to the pensioner/ family pensioner who are in
receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable to the Old Age Pensions, Political Pensions or any
other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the service rendered under
Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to Pensioners
who retired from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad and whose Pension
Payment Orders have been issued by the Director, Local Fund Audit or Director,
Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.”

240
 (IV) | *’The Governor is pleased to order that the State Government Pensioners who are in
receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid, compensation pension, family pension or extra
ordinary pension etc. shall be paid Dearness Relief to compensate them for rise in cost of
living beyond average CPI 1510 at the uniform rate as indicated below: -

Period Rate of D.R. per month
From 1.1.1997 to 30.6.1997 8% of Pension/ Family Pension
From 1.7.1997 onwards 13% of Pension/ Family Pension

For the purpose of these orders —

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998.

In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

A ready reckoner showing the dearness relief payable from 1-1-1997 to
30.6.1997 and from 1.7.1997 onwards in terms of these orders is enclosed.

This department order No.F.1(25)FD(Rules)/93 dated 25.10.1996 and
1.5.1997 sanctioning Dearness Relief to pensioners w.e.f. 1.7.1996 and
1.1.1997 are hereby superseded with effect from 1.1.1997. Payment on
account of dearness relief made to pensioners/family pensioners in terms of
these orders from 1.1.1997 will be adjusted against the dearness relief
payable to them under the revised rates in terms of this order.

This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit Department or Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan, Jaipur.

Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998.

241
 (x) In the case of Government servant drawing pay in the UGC Pay scale and
who retired / retire from service on or after 1.9.1996, the pension/ family
pension for the purpose of calculating dearness relief at aforesaid rates, will
include the amount of dearness relief sanctioned with effect from 1.1.1996
plus first two instalment of interim relief.

Instructions for Pension Disbursing Authorities :

No payment of arrears on account of dearness relief from 1.1.1997 and 1.7.1997 as
per this order should be made to pre-1.9.1996 pensioners/ family pensioners as the arrears
in their case are to be paid with reference to the statement attached to this department
Memorandum No. F.15(2)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998. After the payment of arrears,
future dearness relief may be paid to the pre-1.9.1996 pensioners/ family pensioners on the
basis of this order.

In case of Government servant who have retired / died while in service during the
period 1.1.1997 to 31.12.1997, the mode of payment of arrear on account of the aforesaid
revision in the rates of dearness relief shall be the same as that of arrear of pension/
commutation/ gratuity as indicated in Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998.”

242
 (५) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order No.F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.3.1998 to
State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family pension and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised with effect
from 1.1.1998 as follows: -

Date from which payable Rate of D.R. per month

1.1.1998 16% of Pension/ Family Pension

For the purpose of these orders —

(i)

(i)

(iii)

(ix)

Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998.

In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

A ready reckoner showing the dearness relief payable from 1-1-1998
onwards in terms of these orders is enclosed.

This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

In the case of Government servant drawing pay in the UGC Pay scale and
who retired / retire from service on or after 1.9.1996, the pension/ family
pension for the purpose of calculating dearness relief at aforesaid rates, will
include the amount of dearness relief sanctioned with effect from 1.1.1996
plus first two instalment of interim relief.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 16.5.1998.

243
 (VI) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order No.F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 16.5.1998 to
State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family pension and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised with effect
from 1.7.1998 as follows: -

Date from which payable Rate of D.R. per month

1.7.1998 22% of Pension/ Family Pension

For the purpose of these orders —

(i)

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)
(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998.

In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

A ready reckoner showing the dearness relief payable from 1-7-1998
onwards in terms of these orders is enclosed.

This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

In the case of Government servant drawing pay in the UGC Pay scale and
who retired / retire from service on or after 1.9.1996, the pension/ family
pension for the purpose of calculating dearness relief at aforesaid rates, will
include the amount of dearness relief sanctioned with effect from 1.1.1996
plus first two instalment of interim relief.”

i Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 17.10.1998.

244
 (VII) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order No.F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 17.10.1998 to
State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family pension and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised with effect
from 1.1.1999 as follows: -

Date from which payable Rate of D.R. per month

1.1.1999 32% of Pension/ Family Pension

For the purpose of these orders —

(i)

(ii)

(ix)

Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

A ready reckoner showing the dearness relief payable from 1.1.1999
onwards in terms of these orders is enclosed.

This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 15.5.1999.

245
 (VIII) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order No.F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 15.05.1999 to
State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family pension and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised with effect
from 1.7.1999 as follows: -

Date from which payable Rate of D.R. per month

1.7.1999 37% of Pension/ Family Pension

For the purpose of these orders —

(i)

(ii)

(ix)

Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

A ready reckoner showing the dearness relief payable from 1.7.1999
onwards in terms of these orders is enclosed.

This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 6.7.2000.

246
 (IX) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order No.F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 6.7.2000 to State
Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family pension and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised with effect
from 1.1.2000 as follows: -

Date from which payable Rate of D.R. per month
1.1.2000 38% of Pension/ Family Pension

For the purpose of these orders —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

(ii) In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) A ready reckoner showing the dearness relief payable from 1.1.2000
onwards in terms of these orders is enclosed.

(vi) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vii) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

(viii) _Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

(ix) The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 7.7.2000.

247
 (X) “The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order of even number dated 7.7.2000 to the State
Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised from 38% to 41% with
effect from 1.7.2000.

For the purpose of these orders —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

(ii) In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vi) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

(vii) Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

(viii) The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 27.4.2001.

248
 (Xl) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order of even number dated 27.4.2001 to the State
Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised from 41% to 43% with
effect from 1.1.2001.

For the purpose of these orders —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

(ii) In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vi) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

(vii) Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

(viii) The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 13.11.2001.

249
 (XII) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order of even number dated 13.11.2001 to the State
Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised from 43% to 45% with
effect from 1.7.2001.

For the purpose of these orders —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

(ii) In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vi) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

(vii) Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

(viii) The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 30.8.2002.

250
 (2(॥॥) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order of even number dated 30.8.2002 to the State
Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised from 45% to 49% with
effect from 1.1.2002.

For the purpose of these orders —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

(ii) In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vi) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

(vii) Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

(viii) The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 4.2.2003.

251
 (XIV) The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order of even number dated 4 February, 2003 to the
State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised from 49% to 52%
w.e.f. 1.7.2003.

For the purpose of these orders —

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(vii)

(viii)

Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

"The rates of Dearness Relief to the State Government Pensioner who are in receipt
of superannuation, retiring, invalid, compensation, family and extra ordinary pension etc.
was revised from 49% to 52% w.e.f. 1.7.2003 vide orders of even number dated 4.2.2003.

In partial modification of aforesaid order, the Governor is pleased to order that the
rates of dearness relief revised from 49% to 52% w.e.f. 1.7.2003 shall be revised w.e.f.
1.7.2002 instead of 1.7.2003.”

1 Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 4.2.2003.
2 Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 22.7.2003.

252
 (XV) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order of even number dated 04.02.2003 to the State
Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised from 52% to 55% with
effect from 1.1.2003.

For the purpose of these orders —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

(ii) In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vi) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

(vii) Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

(viii) The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 6.10.2003.

253
 (XVI) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order of even number dated 67 October, 2003 to the
State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised, in respect of
instalment of Dearness Relief due from 1.7.2003, from 55% to 59% and it shall be payable
in cash w.e.f. 1.3.2004.

For the purpose of these orders —

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.

Orders for payment of arrear for the period from 1.7.2003 to 28.2.2004 shall be
issued separately in due course.”

Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 6.10.2003.

254
 (XVII) *’The revision of rate of Dearness Pension from 55% to 59% w.e.f. 1.7.2003 was
sanctioned to the State Government Pensioners vide Finance Department Order of even
number dated 6.10.2003. The cash payment of increase in dearness relief of aforesaid
instalment has been allowed w.e.f. 1.3.2004 and in last para of the aforesaid order it was
mentioned that order for payment of arrear for the period from 1.7.2003 to 29.2.2004 shall
be issued separately in due course.

Accordingly, the matter has been considered and the Governor is pleased to order
that the arrear of revision of aforesaid instalment of dearness relief for the period from
1.7.2003 to 29.2.2004 may be paid in cash to the State Government Pensioners.”

ढ़ Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 25.03.2004.

255
 (XVIII) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order of even number dated 67 October, 2003 to the
State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension etc. shall be revised, in respect of
instalment of Dearness Relief due from 1.1.2004, from 59% to 61% and it shall be payable
in cash w.e.f. 1.7.2004 (pension of June, 2004). The arrear of the revision of this instalment
of Dearness Relief for the period from 1.1.2004 to 31.5.2004 shall be payable in cash to the
State Government Pensioners after 1.6.2004.

For the purpose of these orders —

(i)

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998.

In the case of pensioners who retire from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 24.05.2004.

256
 (XIX) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department order of even number dated 24.05.2004 to the State
Government pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension shall be revised w.e.f. 1.7.2004, as under:

(1) Out of existing 61% Dearness Relief sanctioned vide order of even number dated
24.05.2004 50% Dearness Relief has been treated as Dearness Pension and rest
11% Dearness Relief is to be allowed on Pension/Family Pension as per this
department order No. F6(3)FD(Rules)/2004 dated 24.5.2004. In case of Government
servants retired/retiring on or after 1.7.2004, 11% Dearness Relief is to be calculated
on the basis of two thirds of Basic Pension as per example given in para 3 of this
department order No. F13(2)FD/Rules/2004 dated 25.9.2004.

(2) Dearness Relief @ 3% shall be allowed w.e.f. 1.7.2004 on the total of Pension /
Family Pension and Dearness Pension.

(3) The Dearness Relief instalment of 3% shall be payable with monthly pension w.e.f.
1.1.2005 (pension for December, 2004). This instalment of Dearness Relief, for the
period from 1.7.2004 to 30.11.2004, shall be payable to the State Government
pensioners as arrear after 1.4.2005.

For the purpose of this order: —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998. It shall not include Dearness Relief shown as
Dearness Pension.

(ii) In the case pensioners who retired from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998 and it shall not include Dearness
Relief shown as Dearness Pension.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vi) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 14.10.2004.

257
 (vii) Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

(viii) The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

(XX) “Grant of Dearness Relief on pension to retired All India Service Officer
belonging to the cadre of this State.

The provisions regarding payment of Dearness Relief on pension to retired All India
Service Officers belonging to State Cadre are applicable as issued by the Government of
India from time to time.

It has been brought to the notice of the State Government by some retired All India
Service Officers belonging to the Rajasthan cadre that payment of instalments of Dearness
Relief to them is not made by various Banks even after orders to that effect have been
issued by the Government of India.

Accordingly, it is clarified that as and when orders for revision of rates of Dearness
Relief on pension are issued by Government of India for Central Government pensioners,
the payment of the revised Dearness Relief to pensioners of Rajasthan Cadre belonging to
All India Service may be made without awaiting further orders of the State Government.”

1 Inserted vide F.D. Memorandum No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 21.12.2004.

258
 (220) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department order of even number dated 14.10.2004 to the State
Government pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension shall be revised w.e.f. 1.1.2005, as under:

(1) Out of existing 61% Dearness Relief sanctioned vide order of even number dated
24.05.2004, 50% Dearness Relief has been treated as Dearness Pension and rest
11% Dearness Relief is to be allowed on Pension/Family Pension as per this
department order No. F6(3)FD(Rules)/2004 dated 24.5.2004. In case of Government
servants retired/retiring on or after 1.7.2004, 11% Dearness Relief is to be calculated
on the basis of two thirds of Basic Pension as per example given in para 3 of this
department order No. F13(2)FD/Rules/2004 dated 25.9.2004.

(2) Dearness Relief @ 3% indicated in item (2) of this department order
No.F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 14.10.2004 shall be revised to 6% w.e.f. 1.1.2005 and
it shall be admissible on the total of Pension / Family Pension and Dearness
Pension.

For the purpose of this order: —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998. It shall not include Dearness Relief shown as
Dearness Pension.

(ii) In the case pensioners who retired from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998 and it shall not include Dearness
Relief shown as Dearness Pension.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vi) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 19.04.2005.

259
 (vii)

(viii)

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale.”

260
 (XXII) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 19.04.2005 to
the State Government pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension shall be revised w.e.f. 1.7.2005, as under:-

(1)

(2)

(3)

Out of existing 61% Dearness Relief sanctioned vide order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98
dated 24.05.2004, 50% Dearness Relief has been treated as Dearness Pension and
rest 11% Dearness Relief is to be allowed on Pension/Family Pension only (not on
Dearness Pension) as per this department order No. F6(3)FD(Rules)/2004 dated
24.5.2004. In case of Government servants retired/retiring on or after 1.7.2004, 11%
Dearness Relief is to be calculated on the basis of two thirds of Basic Pension as per
example given in para 3 of this department order No. F13(2)FD/Rules/2004 dated
25.9.2004.

Dearness Relief @ 6% as indicated in item (2) of this department order
No.F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98 dated 19.04.2005 is payable on both Pension / Family
Pension and Dearness Pension.

Now, the Dearness Relief payable on both Basic Pension / Family Pension and
Dearness Pension is increased by 4%, that is, from 6% to 10% with effect from
01.07.2005.

For the purpose of this order —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998. It shall not include Dearness Relief shown as
Dearness Pension.

(ii) In the case pensioners who retired from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998 and it shall not include Dearness
Relief shown as Dearness Pension.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vi) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 27.01.2006.

261
 (vii)

(viii)

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale/ AICTE
pay scale.”

262
 (XXIll) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department order No. F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 27.01.2006 to
the State Government pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension shall be revised w.e.f. 01.01.2006, as
under:-

(1) Out of existing 61% Dearness Relief sanctioned vide order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98
dated 24.05.2004, 50% Dearness Relief has been treated as Dearness Pension and
rest 11% Dearness Relief is to be allowed on Pension/Family Pension only (not on
Dearness Pension) as per this department order No. F6(3)FD(Rules)/2004 dated
24.5.2004. In case of Government servants retired/retiring on or after 1.7.2004, 11%
Dearness Relief is to be calculated on the basis of two thirds of Basic Pension as per
example given in para 3 of this department order No. F13(2)FD/Rules/2004 dated
25.9.2004.

(2) Dearness Relief @ 10% as indicated in item (3) of this department order
No.F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 27.01.2006, is payable on both Pension / Family
Pension and Dearness Pension, is increased by 3%, that is, from 10% to 13% with
effect from 01.01.2006.

For the purpose of this order —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998. It shall not include Dearness Relief shown as
Dearness Pension.

(ii) In the case pensioners who retired from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998 and it shall not include Dearness
Relief shown as Dearness Pension.

(iii) Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

(iv) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(v) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(vi) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 29.08.2006.

263
 (vii)

(viii)

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit or Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scale/ AICTE
pay scale.”

264
 (XXIV) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department order No. F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 29.08.2006 to
the State Government pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra ordinary pension shall be revised w.e.f. 01.07.2006, as
under:-

(1) Out of existing 61% Dearness Relief sanctioned vide order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98
dated 24.05.2004, 50% Dearness Relief has been treated as Dearness Pension and
remaining 11% Dearness Relief is to be allowed on Pension/Family Pension only
(not on Dearness Pension) as per this department order No. F6(3)FD(Rules)/2004
dated 24.5.2004. In case of Government servants retired/retiring on or after
1.7.2004, 11% Dearness Relief is to be calculated on the basis of two thirds of Basic
Pension as per example given in para 3 of this department order No.
F13(2)FD/Rules/2004 dated 25.9.2004.

(2) Dearness Relief @ 13% as indicated in item (2) of this department order
No.F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 29.08.2006, payable on Pension / Family Pension
and Dearness Pension, is increased by 5%, that is, from 13% to 18% with effect from
01.07.2006.

For the purpose of this order —

(i) Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.4.1999 and Memorandum No. F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 11.6.1998. It shall not include Dearness Relief shown as
Dearness Pension.

(ii) In the case pensioners who retired from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification
No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998 and it shall not include Dearness
Relief shown as Dearness Pension.

(iii) Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

(iv) This order shall also be applicable in case of pensioners/ family pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

(v) This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions, which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

(vi) Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit Department or Director, Pension and Pensioners’
Welfare Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 29.01.2007.

265
 (vii) The provisions of this order shall also be applicable to those Government

servants who retired / retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scales/ AICTE
pay scales.

(viii) | Payment of Dearness Relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.”

266
 (XXV) *’The Governor is pleased to order that the existing rates of Dearness Relief
sanctioned vide Finance Department Order No. F.13(1)FD(Rules)/ 2005 dated 29.01.2007
to the State Government Pensioners who are in receipt of superannuation, retiring, invalid,
compensation, family and extra-ordinary pension shall be revised w.e.f. 01.12.2006 as
under: -

(1) Out of existing 61% Dearness Relief sanctioned vide order No. F.15(1)FD(Rules)/98
dated 24.05.2004, 50% Dearness Relief has been treated as Dearness Pension.

(2) Dearness Relief @ 18% as indicated in item (2) of this Department Order No.
F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 29.01.2007, payable on Pension / Family Pension and
Dearness Pension, is revised to 29%, with effect from 01.12.2006 (Pension / Family
Pension of December 2006). Dearness Relief @ 11% as indicated in item (1) of this
Department Order No. F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 29.01.2007, stands merged in
the 29% Dearness Relief. For example:-

1. Retirement / death of a Government servant upto 30.06.2004
If a pensioner / family pensioner drawing Basic Pension / Family Pension of
Rs.4000/- per month, then the D.R. shall be calculated as under:

A. Existing Dearness Relief (D.R.)

Basic Pension / Family Pension Rs. 4000/-
Dearness Pension Rs. 2000/-
Total Rs. 6000/-

D.R. @ 11% only on Basic Pension / Family Pension | Rs. 440/-
i.e. Rs. 4000/-

D.R. @ 18% on Rs. 6000/- (Basic Pension / Family | Rs. 1080/-
Pension Rs. 4000/- + Dearness Pension Rs. 2000/-)

Total D.R. Rs. 1520/-

B. Consequent upon this order, D.R. w.e.f. 01.12.2006 shall be as under:
Basic Pension / Family Pension Rs. 4000/-
Dearness Pension Rs. 2000/-

Total Rs. 6000/-

D.R. @ 29% on Rs. 6000/- (Basic Pension / Family | Rs. 1740/-
Pension Rs. 4000/- + Dearness Pension Rs. 2000/-)

Il. Retirement / death of a Government servant on or after 01.07.2004

If a pensioner / family pensioner drawing basic pension Rs. 6000/- per month,
then the D.R. shall be calculated as under:
A. Existing Dearness Relief (D.R.)

2/3” of Basic Pension / Family Pension Rs. 4000/-
1/3 of Basic Pension / Family Pension Rs. 2000/-
Total Basic Pension / Family Pension Rs. 6000/-

D.R. @ 11% only on 2/3 of Basic Pension / Family | Rs. 440/-
Pension i.e. Rs. 4000/-
D.R. @ 18% on Rs. 6000/- (Total Basic Pension / | Rs. 1080/-
Family Pension)
Total D.R. Rs. 1520/-

* Inserted vide F.D.Order No. F.13(1)FD(Rules)/2005 dated 31.01.2007.

267
 Consequent upon this order, D.R. w.e.f. 01.12.2006 shall be as under:

2/3" of Basic Pension / Family Pension Rs. 4000/-
1/3 of Basic Pension / Family Pension Rs. 2000/-
Total Basic Pension / Family Pension Rs. 6000/-
D.R. @ 29% on Rs. 6000/- (Total Basic Pension / | Rs. 1740/-
Family Pension)

For the purpose of this order -

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(vii)

(viii)

Pension/Family Pension in the case of pre-01.09.1996 retirees and where
Family Pension was sanctioned prior to 01.09.1996, means the Consolidated
Pension or Consolidated Family Pension, as the case may be, effective from
01.09.1996 in terms of Finance Department Memorandum No.F.15(2)FD
(Rules)/98 dated 21.03.1998 & 15.04.1999 and Memorandum No.F.15(5)FD
(Rules)/ 98 dated 11.06.1998.

In the case of pensioners who retired from service on or after 01.09.1996 or
where family pension is sanctioned for the first time on or after 01.09.1996,
Pension/Family Pension means the Basic Pension/Basic Family Pension, as
the case may be, in terms of Finance Department Notification No.F.15(3)FD
(Rules)/ 97 dated 21.03.1998.

Other provisions governing grant of dearness relief to pensioners such as
regulation of dearness relief during employment/re-employment, regulation of
dearness relief where more than one pension is drawn etc., will remain
unchanged.

This order shall also be applicable in case of Pensioners/Family Pensioners
who are in receipt of provisional pension.

This order shall not be applicable in case of Old Age Pensions, Political
Pension or any other kind of similar pensions, which are not related to the
service rendered under Government.

Dearness Relief at revised rates as above would also be admissible to
pensioners who retired/retire from service of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
Parishad and whose Pension Payment Orders have been issued by the
Director, Local Fund Audit Department or Director, Pension and Pensioners’
Welfare Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.

The provision of this order shall also be applicable to those Government
servants who retired/retire while drawing pay in the UGC pay scales/ AICTE
pay scales.

Payment of dearness relief involving a fraction of a rupee shall be rounded off
to the next higher rupee.”

268
 APPENDIX - IV

THE RAJASTHAN CIVIL SERVICES
(MEDICAL EXAMINATION) RULES, 1996

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
(Rules Division)

NOTIFICATION

No. F.1(7)FD(Rules)/96 Jaipur dated the Sept. 18, 1996.

In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution,

the Governor of Rajasthan hereby makes the following rules, namely : —

1.

(1) These rules 183५ be called the Rajasthan Civil Services (Medical
Examination) Rules, 1996.

(2) These rules shall apply to every person—
(a) who is a member of a Civil Service of the State; or
(b) who holds a civil post under the State; or

(1) Where the competent authority has reason to believe that a Government
servant to whom these rules apply is suffering from—-
(a) acontagious disease, or
(b) a physical or mental disability which in its opinion interferes with the
efficient discharge of his duties,

that authority may direct the Government servant to undergo a medical examination
within such period not exceeding one month as may be specified by it and may, if it
considers it essential to do so, also direct the Government servant to proceed on
leave forthwith pending medical examination. Such leave shall not be debited to the
leave account of the Government servant, if the examining medical authority
subsequently expressed the opinion that it was unnecessary for the Government
servant to have been required to proceed on leave.

(2) On the basis of the opinion expressed by the examining medical authority
and subject to the provisions of sub-rule (3), the competent authority may require the
Government servant to proceed on leave or, if he is already on leave to continue to
remain on leave or may retire him from service if he is a permanent Government
servant or if he is a temporary Government servant recruited through RPSC on a
post within their purview or recruited strictly in accordance with the relevant service
rules on a post out side the purview of RPSC; or may terminate his services in other
cases.

(3) The procedure for a medical examination, grant of leave on retirement from
service, or termination of service under this rule shall be such as the Governor may
by order prescribe.

(4) For the purpose of this rule, competent authority in relation to a Government

servant means the authority competent to dismiss him and includes such other
authority as the Governor may by order specify in this behalf.

269
 (5)

For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that non-compliance with a

direction given under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) of this rule will be considered good
and sufficient reason for the imposition of a penalty in accordance with the rules
governing discipline applicable to the Government servant concerned.

3 A Government servant who has retired from service under sub-rule (2) of Rule 2 may
be granted such invalid pension, gratuity or Provident Fund benefits as may be admissible
to him under the rules applicable to him on the date of such retirement

4. A Government servant whose services have been terminated in pursuance of sub-
rule (2) of Rule 2 may be granted such gratuity as may be admissible under the rules
applicable to him on the date of such termination.

5. If any question arises relating to the interpretation of these rules, it shall be referred
to the Government whose decision thereon shall be final.

GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN’S DECISIONS

In pursuance of sub-rule (3) of Rule 2 of the Rajasthan Civil Services
(Medical Examination) Rules, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the said rules),
the examining medical authority shall be—

a Medical Board, in the case of (i) all Gazetted Government servants and
(ii) those non-gazetted Government servants whose pay, as defined in Rule 7
(24) of the Rajasthan Service Rules exceeds Rs.2200 p.m.

a Civil Surgeon or District Medical Officer or a Medical Officer of equivalent
status, in other cases.

(1) The authority directing the Government servant to undergo medical
examination under sub-rule (1) of Rule 2 of the said rules shall communicate
to the examining medical authority all such details concerning the medical
history of the case as might be available in his office records of the case and
shall include a directive and the standard of physical fitness to be adopted,
should make due allowance for the age and length of service of the
Government servant concerned.

(2) The Authority directing the Government servant to proceed on leave
pending medical examination under sub-rule (1) of Rule 2 of the said Rules
shall also intimate the fact to the examining medical authority and require it to
express an opinion on the necessity for the Government servant to have
been required to proceed on leave.

(1) If the examining medical authority finds the Government servant to be in
a bad state of health and consider that a period of absence from duty is
necessary in his case for the recovery of his health, it may recommend the
grant of leave to him for that period.

(2) If that authority considers that there is no reasonable prospect of the
Government servant recovering his health and becoming fit to resume his
duties, it shall record the opinion that the Government servant is permanently
incapacitated for service and also give detailed reasons for that opinion.

(3) If the Examining Medical Officer, although unable to discover any specific
disease in the Government servant, considers him incapacitated for further

270
 service by general debility while still under the age of fifty five years, he
should give detailed reasons for his opinion, and if possible, a second
medical opinion should always in such a case be obtained.

(4) A simple certificate that inefficiency is due to old age or natural decay
from advancing years, is not sufficient in the case of an officer whose
recorded age is less than 55 years, but a Medical Officer is at liberty, when
certifying that the officer is incapacitated for further service by general
debility, to state his reasons for believing the age to be under stated.

NOTE

Senile cataract, arterial changes consequent on senile decay, general
nervous-breakdown, and commencing cataract may be treated as specific
disease as they may come before a man reaches the 55th year of his age.

(5) In either case the examining medical authority shall communicate its
findings to the authority which directed the Government servant to undergo
the medical examination.

(1) A Government servant in whose case the grant of leave is recommended
by the examining medical authority, shall be required to proceed on leave,
or, if he is already on leave, continue to remain on leave, by the authority
competent to grant him leave as soon as findings of the medical authority
become available.

(2) The leave granted under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule(2) of Rule 2 of the said
rules shall be of such nature and for such period as would be admissible to
the Government servant under the rules applicable to him if he had applied
for the leave on medical certificate provided that the period of leave shall not
extend beyond the date of expiry of the period recommended by the medical
authority.

(1) A Government servant declared by the examining medical authority to be
permanently incapacitated for further service shall be retired from service, but
before the Government servant is actually retired from service, the authority
which directed him to undergo the medical examination shall inform him in
writing of the action proposed to be taken in regard to him indicating briefly
the grounds on which such action is proposed to be taken.

(2) The Government servant shall also be informed that -

(a) subject to the provisions of Rule 81 of R.S.R. and any orders regarding
grant of leave to persons suffering from specified disease like
tuberculosis, his retirement will have effect on expiry of a period of one
month from the date of communication unless he so desires to retire or
quit from an earlier date;

(b) he may submit, if he so desires, within the period of one month, a
request to be examined by Medical Review Board supported by prima
facie evidence that good grounds exist for doing so; and

(c) if he prefers a request for examination by a Medical Review Board, he
shall be liable to pay the fees prescribed under paragraph 7 below.

271
 (3) For the period from the date of communication upto the date of retirement
under paragraph 6, the Government servant shall be granted leave under the
rules applicable to his post or service as if he had applied for leave on
medical certificate.

6. On receipt of an application for review, the competent authority shall take steps to
get special Review Board constituted by requesting the Director Medical and Health
Services or the Principal of the concerned Medical College. If the Review Board confirms the
opinion of the examining authority, the retirement of the Government servant shall, subject
to the provisions of rule 81 of R.S.R. be effective from the date on which the decision is
communicated to the Government servant. If, on the other hand, the Review Board
recommends grant of leave to the Government servant, action shall be taken as provided in
paragraph 4.

7. (1) The entire expenditure for medical examination conducted at the instance of
the employing department to ascertain whether a Government servant is fit for continuance
in service or not shall be borne by the Government. This will include Travelling Allowance
as on tour with halting allowance where the medical examination is carried out at a station
other than the headquarters of the Government servant concerned and also reimbursement
of fee charged, if any, for such examination. The expenditure incurred in assembling the
Review Board shall also be borne by the Government provided that the Government servant
shall be required to pay a prescribed fee which shall be refunded if the Government servant
is not retired or his services are not terminated as recommended by the examining authority.

(2) Under orders of the Government of Rajasthan no employee under any
circumstances whatever, has to be retained in active employment when he is physically or
mentally unfit for the proper discharge of his duty. When a Government servant is in bad
health and unable to perform his duties in a satisfactory manner, it is his business to apply
for and obtain leave. If he does not go on leave and neglects his duty, the excuse if put
forward, that he was in bad health, will not be accepted. In appropriate cases, the
employees may be sent for medical examination for adjudging his fitness to continue in
service in accordance with the provisions of the above rules.

By order of the Governor,

Dr. ADARSH KISHORE
Secretary to the Government

272
 APPENDIX V
RULES REGULATING THE COMPASSIONATE FUND OF THE
GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN.
(See Rule 44 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 96)
1. Eligibility. -

The Compassionate Fund is intended for affording relief to the families of
Government servants paid from the State revenues, if they be left in indigent circumstances
on account of premature death of the Government Servant.

2. Application.-
No application will ordinarily be considered -

(i) from dependents of a deceased Government servant who was a subscriber
to a Contributory Provident Fund, or

(ii) which is not submitted to the Head of Office concerned within one year of the
death of the Government Servant unless the delay in submission is
sufficiently explained. It is most desirable that the application should be
submitted as promptly as possible after the death of the Government servant.

3. Chargeable head.-

Payments made from the Fund shall be booked under head “2071 - Pensions and
Other Retirement Benefits, 01 - Civil, 103 Compassionate Allowance’.

4. Conditions for the grant of Award.-
Grants from the fund will be governed by the following general conditions :-

(1) Grants from the Fund are restricted to cases of an exceptionally deserving
character, where the family is left in indigent circumstances;

(2) The deceased Government servant must have rendered continuous and good
service. Meritorious service gives special claim to consideration;

(3) Death due to or accelerated by special devotion to duty establishes a strong
claim to consideration;

(4) In ordinary cases, preference will be given to the dependents of those who have
put in long years of services;

(5) Other things being equal, preference will be given to those who have been in the
lower pay ranges.

(6) As a general rule, a grant will not be given if the last basic pay of the deceased
Government servant exceeded “"Rs.15,000/-" per mensem:

Provided that in case of a family not entitled to family pension, grant from the Fund
may be sanctioned in deserving cases even though the last basic pay exceeded
™Rs.15,000/-" per mensem:

1. The existing words & figures "Rs. 5000/-" substituted vide FD Notification No.F.15(3)FD(Rules)/97 dated 21.3.1998 w.e.f 1.10.1996.

273
 5. Amount of grant.-

(1) All awards from the fund will be purely ex-gratia.

(2) No family pension will ordinarily be granted from the Fund. Grant from the Fund
will generally be in the shape of ‘Gratuity’.

(3) In exceptional cases, suitable recurring grants may be sanctioned payable
monthly, quarterly, half yearly or yearly, for a limited period as assistance towards special
needs such as to defray the expenses of the education of children. These recurring grants
will be subject to such conditions as the Committee constituted under Rules 6 may impose
to satisfy itself regarding the continuance of the need, utilisation of the amount etc.

(4) The Committee may also consider grants from the Fund in cases where -
(i) family members are suffering from serious illness like Cancer, T.B. etc.;
(ii) imparting of training to a child would improve the prospects for getting a job;

(iii) marriage of a daughter of the deceased government servant.

(5) Normally the amount payable in any individual case will be Rs. 10,000/- which
may be increased in exceptional cases to a maximum of Rs. 20,000. The precise amount
will be fixed keeping in view the number of members of the family, the ages of the children
and pressing necessities of the family. The case of a widow where there is no other adult
member in the family of a male deceased Government servant who, for valid reasons, is not
in a position to accept appointment to a post under the Government or Public Undertaking
when offered, shall be a reasonable case to be treated as exception for increased grant.

(6) In the case of death of the original grantee of a gratuity sanctioned out of
Compassionate Fund before the receipt of the amount, the payment will be made to the
children through such person as may be considered deserving by the Committee referred to
in Rule 6.

6. Administration of Fund.-

The Compassionate Fund will be administered by a Committee consisting of the
following:-

ds Finance Secretary Chairman
2. Secretary Personnel
3. Dy. Secretary, Finance(Rules) Secretary.

The Chairman of the Committee may, if he considers necessary, invite the Secretary
of the concerned administrative department or his representative not below the rank of
Deputy Secretary to join the deliberations when cases relating to their departments are
considered in the Committee.

7. Powers to relax.-

Notwithstanding anything contained in the above rules and excepting the maximum
limit of the grant of Rs. 20,000, the Committee administering the Fund under rule 6, may
relax the provisions of these rules in deserving cases for reasons to be recorded in writing,
in a just and equitable manner.

274
 8. Procedure.-

(1) (a) Applications for grant from the Compassionate Fund shall be made in the
prescribed form appended to this Appendix, in triplicate, alongwith attested
copies of passport size photographs, to the Head of Office where the
deceased Government servant was employed immediately before death.

(b) The Head of Office on receipt of the application will scrutinise the particulars
furnished therein and forward all the three copies to his Head of Department,
within 10 days of the receipt of the application.

(c) The Head of the Department shall forward one copy of the application to the
Collector of the concerned District for a report on the financial condition of the
family and on the other financial particulars mentioned in the application form,
within 10 days of the receipt of the same from the Head of Office. The
second copy of the application form will be submitted to the Secretary of the
Administrative Department concerned.

(d) The concerned District Collector shall make out his report as early as
possible, but not later than 30 days in any case, to the Secretary of the
Committee of the Fund i.e. Deputy Secretary to Government, Finance (Rules)
Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.

(2) The Committee will meet in the third week of April, July, October and January to
consider and make recommendations in applications received by the Secretary upto the last
day of the preceding month.

(3) The sanction for payment of grant to provide relief to the families of the deceased
Government servants out of the Fund shall be issued by the Government in the Finance
(Rules) Department and the Head of Office/Head of Department in which the deceased
Government servant was employed immediately before death shall draw money from the
Treasury on simple receipt form on the basis of the sanction issued by the Government and
make payment of the grant to the member (s) of the family of the deceased Government
servant. No authority from the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan will be required for
such payment. After disbursement of the grant, the drawing officer will intimate the Treasury
Voucher Number and Date to the Finance (Rules) Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.

9. Interim payment to provide immediate relief.-

(1) On receipt of application from the Head of the Department for a report on the
financial position of the applicant as provided in Rule 8(1)(c), the Collector may, of his own
or on a request being made to him in writing by the applicant or the head of office for
immediate relief, place the case before a sub Committee consisting of the following-

1. District Collector Chairman
2. Treasury Officer
3. Seniormost officer of the

concerned deptt. stationed at
the distt. headquarters.

In case the seniormost officer of the Department stationed at the district headquarters
is the Head of the Department, the latter may nominate his additional or deputy Head of the
Department. The Treasury Officer will act as Secretary to the above Sub Committee.

(2) The Sub Committee will work under the direction and supervision of the
Committee to administer the Compassionate Fund formed under Rule 6.

275
 (3) On the recommendations of the Sub Committee, the District Collector shall be
competent to sanction payment of grant from the Compassionate Fund for an amount not
exceeding Rs. 5,000/- in each case, under intimation to the Secretary of the Committee to
administer the Compassionate Fund formed under Rule 6 i.e. Deputy Secretary, Finance
(Rules) Department. After issue of the sanction, he will forward the case to the Committee
alongwith his recommendations for further decision.

(4) This interim grant not exceeding Rs.5,000 will be adjusted from the final sanction,
if any, accorded by the committee.

10. Bar to payment from the fund :-

No payment including interim payment shall be considered for sanction to the family
of a Government servant who is entitled to receive ex-gratia grant under rule 75 and 76 of
Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.

276
 APPLICATION FOR THE GRANT OF AN AWARD
FROM THE COMPASSIONATE FUND OF THE
GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN
PART I
(To be completed by the applicant)
1. (a) Name of the deceased

(b) Particulars of dependents family members with their age and occupation. (In
the case of persons gainfully employed income should also be

2460)...................... --.--

(In the case of children receiving education, name the institution and the
classes in which they are studying)

Name Relationship Age Name of the Class Remarks
Institution

(Here indicate if in
occupation, the date
since when, the
capacity in and the
establishment in which
he/she has been
employed with the
details of pay and
allowances drawn in
that post.)

(c) Where the widow/daughter/son was
given an employment of compassionate
grounds and whether she/he is still con-
tinuing in that employment ..... .....

(The details of the employment should be
shown in the Remarks Column above)

Note:- “Dependent” means family members of the deceased Government servant
and shall include wife or husband, sons and unmarried or widow daughters,
who were dependent on the deceased Government servant.

2. Father/brother/son or sons of the deceased.
Name Relation Age Annual Amount of financial
Income assistance they are

able to provide to the
family of the deceased

277
 3. Whether the family has been allowed to share residential accommodation

with any relatives.

4. Pecuniary or property benefits received :-

(a) amount which became available to the dependents after death of the
Government servant. :-

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)

(viii)

Family pension.

Gratuity or total of Contributory Provident Fund in case
Government servant was not under pensionable service.

General Provident Fund.
From State Insurance Department.

From Life Insurance Corporation/any other Insurance
Company.

Cash balance in Bank or Post Office Savings Bank.

Funds invested : in Companies, Co-operatives, Small Savings,
Private loanees.

From other sources.

(b) Whether having any immovable property. If so, amount of rent
received per month. If house is used wholly or partly for residence of the
family of the deceased, this should be indicated.

5. (a) Name and address of the applicant

(b) Relationship to the deceased Government Servant

6. Reasons for assistance from the Compassionate Fund of the Government of
Rajasthan.
है If an application is being made after the expiry of one year from the date of

death of the deceased Government servant mention reasons for delay and also indicate
how the widow and children have been subsisting during this period

8. Name of the Treasury in which payment is desired. | certify that the
information given above is correct.

Place:

Dated the .......................-.-

(Signature or

thumb-impression of the applicant)

278
 Part Il
Descriptive Roll

(To be Completed by the applicant)

PHOTO

Descriptive Roll of the applicant :-

(a) Height.

(b) Age.

(c) Colour.

(d) Personal marks, if any on the hand, face etc.

(e) Signature or left hand thumb finger impressions.
Small Ring Middle Index Thumb
finger finger Finger finger
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )

Note:- Three Photos of pass-port size of the applicant duly attested by Gazetted

officer be pasted at the appropriate place.

Signature of the Officer
attesting the descriptive roll

279
 PART Ill

(To be completed by Administrative Authority)

1 (a) Date of entry into service of the deceased Government servant.
(b) Last appointment held by the deceased Government servant
(c) Pay and allowances at the time of death.................
Pay
Special Pay, if any,
Dearness allowance
House rent allowance
Compensatory (city)
allowances
Any other allowances
with details
है न न
(0) Date of birth ..
(e) Date of death ...
2. Total service rendered: year: Month Days
3. Indebtedness to Government for House Building Advance, M.I.G.H. or L.I.G.H. Loan,
and Conveyance Advance.
4. Remarks of the superior officer on the work of the deceased officer as based on the

Character Roll.

(Character Roll for the entire length of service should be forwarded with the

application.)

5. Was death due to or accelerated by devotion/extraordinary devotion to duty ?
6. Recommendations of the Head of the Department regarding the amount of grant
7. Additional remarks, if any

Certified that the information furnished by the applicant at Column 4 (b) of Part | of
has been checked with reference to the property returns furnished or and the
or the sanction obtained by the deceased Government servant under

the application
report made

Rajasthan Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1971 and found to be correct.

19

(Signature and Designation of
Head of Officer/Head of Department)

280
 Note : -

PART IV

(Report by the Collector)

He will also include in this report information relating to interim payment made
under Rule 10.

Signature & Seal
of the Distt. Collector

281
 APPENDIX VI

* SCHEME FOR PAYMENT OF PENSION OF
RAJASTHAN GOVERNMENT CIVIL PENSIONERS BY
PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS

The genesis of Scheme : -

The scheme for payment of pension to pensioners through State Bank of India, State
bank of Bikaner & Jaipur, Bank of Baroda, Punjab National Bank, Central Bank of India and
United Commercial Bank at the places where the branches of these banks exist in the State
will be introduced with effect from 1st July, 1977, so as to enable commencement of
payment of pension for the month of July, 1977 payable on or after 1st August, 1977. The
words “Bank (s)” used hereafter will mean the under noted Banks (1) State Bank of India (2)
State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur (3) Bank of Baroda (4) Punjab National Bank (5) Central
Bank of India (6) United Commercial Bank (7) Union Bank Of India ‘“(8) Allahabad Bank (9)
Bank of India”.

1.1 Pension will be paid through the Bank by credit to pensioners Savings/Current
account at Bank’s branch selected by him on the first working day of the following month or
immediately thereafter. If for exceptional reasons like rush of work on that day it has not
been possible to make payment of pension on 1st of a month, it may be ensured that it is
paid in any case before 5th of the month in which payment is due. No bills shall be required
to be submitted for this purpose.

Scheme is optional:

2. The existing State Civil Pensioners who are drawing their pensions from treasuries
or sub-treasuries in Rajasthan will have an option either to continue to draw their pension
from the treasury or the sub-treasury or to draw pension from any branch of the Bank.
Employees retiring on or after 1st July, 1977 will likewise have option to draw their pension
from treasury or from the branch of the Bank specified above; they will therefore, indicate
their option in the application for pension.

2.1 “The facility of drawal of pension through public sector Banks under this scheme
has been extended with effect from 1.4.1984 to Freedom Fighter Pensioners as per Rules
given in Annexure-VI.”

Action by pensioners:

3. Every pensioner availing of this facility will open Savings/Current Account in his
name unless he is already having one. Pension will not be paid in cash or through a “joint”
or an either or “survivor” Account or through an Agent having power of attorney to operate it.
In other words, he should open an account in his/her/sole name, if he is not already having
one.

3.1 Existing State Civil pensioners who are desirous of drawing their pension from
the Bank will apply to the Treasury Officer/Sub-Treasury Officer from whom they are
receiving pension on or after 1st July, 1977 in form given in Annexure 1.

* Scheme originally issued vide order No. F.6(11)FD(R&A-I)/76 dated 10-6-1977.
1 Inserted vide Finance (G & T) Department Circular No.F.7(7)R & A/94 dated 21.06.2005.

282
 Transfer of P.P.Os to the Bank & Accounting procedure:

4. The detailed procedure to be followed for transfer of pension payment work to the
Bank and accounting of pension payment under the Scheme is outlined in the following
paragraphs :

4.1 The existing All India Service Officers retired from a post under the Central
Government on or after 1.4.81 and who are drawing their pension from Treasuries in the
State, may submit their option to continue to draw their pension from the Treasury or to draw
pension from any public sector bank branch at the specified places.

4.2 In the case of applications received at a sub treasury, the sub-treasury officer
shall on receipt of the option immediately forward both the copies of the application together
with the disburser’s half of the P.P.O. to the District Treasury Officer keeping a note in his
records of the P.P.Os so transferred. If the P.P.O. is torn or mutilated the Treasury
Officer/Sub-Treasury Officer will renew them it before sending it to the Bank.

4.3 The option application (original copy) of the pensioners received by the District
Treasury Officer, directly or through the Sub-Treasury Officer as mentioned in the preceding
paragraph, shall be sent by him, under his special seal and together with disburser’s half of
the P.P.O. to the nominated link branch of the Bank under intimation to the Director
Pension/Accountant General, the documents will be sent to the link branch through a
messenger or under registered cover. Simultaneously, the pensioner will be advised to
approach the Bank branch specified in his application for receiving future pension payments.

4.4 While forwarding the above documents to the link branch the month upto which
pension was paid by Treasury/Sub-Treasury and the month from which pension payment is
to commence shall be clearly indicated.

4.5 In respect of new pensioners, the Director Pension/Accountant General while
issuing the P.P.O. to the Treasury Officer will also mention on the P.P.O. itself the particular
branch of the Bank(s) from which the pensioner has opted to draw pension. The Treasury
Officer will forward both halves of the P.P.O. to the link branch of that Bank.

Transmission of P.P.Os by link branch to paying branch:

5. The Banks will maintain at their link branch a register in the form prescribed in
Annexure II to serve as an index of the pension payments authorised through the Bank.

5.1 The link branch will verify the special seal and signatures of the Treasury officer
forwarding the disburser’s half of the P.P.O. (both halves in case of a new pensioner) with
the special seal and specimen signature on record with the link branch.

5.2 The disburser’s half of the P.P.O. (in case of new pensioners both halves) and
any other documents received from the Treasury Officer (e.g. original copy of the option
application submitted by the pensioner for drawing pension through Banks) will thereafter be
forwarded by the link branch to the branch selected by the pensioner, hereafter referred to
as the “paying branch’.

Functions of paying Branch:

6. On receipt of documents from the link branch, as indicated above and before
commencing payment of pension the paying branch will-

(i) advise the pensioner to appear at the branch for the identification ;

283
 (ii) obtain an undertaking from the pensioner that excess payment
credited to his/her account, due to delay in receipt of any material
information or any bonafide error, can be recovered by the bank ; and

(iii) obtain, in the case of a new pensioner, specimen signature or thumb
impression, as the case may be in the space provided for the purpose
in the disburser’s portion of the P.P.O. and hand over pensioner’s
portion of the P.P.O to him/her.

6.1 The process of identification has been laid down in Rule 186 & 187 of the
Treasury Manual. This comprises checking of the signature of the pensioner with that
available on the disburser’s portion of the P.P.O. and resemblance with the pensioner’s
photograph thereon. A new pensioner has also to produce his personal copy of the letter of
the Director Pension/Accountant General forwarding the P.P.O. in case the photograph is
not available on the disburser’s portion, the paying branch will, in due course, obtain new
photograph from the pensioner (which can be attested by any officer of the Reserve Bank or
a P.S.B.) and complete the disburser’s portion.

6.2 Personal identification will be only for first payment of pension at Bank’s branch.

6.3 No bill will be required to be submitted by the pensioner for drawing pension at
the paying branch. The payment of pension after deduction of tax (indicated in para 6.4
below) will be made by the Bank by credit to Savings/Current account of the pensioner. The
paying branches will record pension payments only on the disburser’s portion of the P.P.O.
and in the prescribed register maintained by them. In case a pensioner requests the paying
branch for recording payments on pensioners portion of the P.P.O. the same shall be
recorded by paying branch.

6.4 The paying branch will be responsible for deduction of Income tax at source from
the pension payments in accordance with the rates prescribed from time to time. In cases of
pensioners from whose pension, Income tax has been so deducted, the paying branch will
issue, in April each year, a certificate of tax deducted in the form prescribed in the Income
tax Rules.

6.5 The paying branch will maintain a detailed record of pension payments made
from time to time at that branch in the form prescribed in Annexure Ill. Each paying branch
will send advice of pension payments made by it to its link branch by the 10th of the month ;
certificate of payment will be recorded on the advice sent. The advice will be supported by a
scroll in triplicate (the scroll will be in the form prescribed in Annexure III) and necessary
certificates submitted by the pensioner.

6.6 OPENING THE BANK ACCOUNT AND FACILITY FOR WITHDRAWAL OF
PENSION TO SICK AND PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PENSIONERS

(1) Opening the Account

In case of a pensioner who has lost both his hands and therefore cannot sign, his
signatures can be obtained by means of a mark. This mark can be placed by the person in
any manner. It could be the toe impression. It can be by means of a mark which anybody
can put on pensioner’s behalf, the mark being put by an instrument which has had a
physical contact with the person who has to sign.

(2) Withdrawal of money from the account

The following method will be adopted in case of sick, incapacitated handicapped
pensioners :

284
 (a) Pensioner who is too ill to sign a cheque and cannot be physically present in the
bank to withdraw money from his account, but can put his thumb/toe impression on the
cheque/withdrawal form

In this case, the thumb or toe impression should be identified by two independent
witnesses known to the Bank, one of whom should be a responsible bank official.

(b) Pensioner who is not only unable to be physically present in the bank, but is also
not even able to put his thumb/toe impression on the cheque/withdrawal form due to certain
physical defect/incapacity.

In this case a mark can be obtained on the cheque/withdrawal form in the same
manner as described in sub-para(1) above. That mark should be identified by two
independent witnesses one of whom should be a responsible bank official.

(c) In both the cases mentioned above, the pensioner might also be asked to indicate
to the Bank as to who would withdraw pension amount from the bank on the basis of
cheque/withdrawal form as obtained above and that person should be identified by two
independent witnesses. The person who is actually drawing the money from the Bank
should be asked to furnish his signatures to the Bank.

Functions of the link branch :

7. On receipt of advices and three copies of scrolls, alongwith the supporting
documents from the other branches, the link branch will segregate the scrolls Treasury-wise
and consolidate them alongwith supporting documents.

7.1 Two copies of the scroll with supporting documents alongwith summary sheet
and a simple receipt (unstamped) acknowledging receipt of the amount from Government on
behalf of the pensioners will be sent by the Bank’s link branch to the Reserve Bank of
India/State Bank of India or its subsidiary transacting Government business at the district
headquarters by the 15th of each month.

Reimbursement of the Banks:

8. On receipt of the scroll etc., from the bank, the Reserve Bank of India/State Bank
of India or its subsidiary shall check the scroll to ensure that it is complete in all respects and
is accompanied by the relevant certificates in respect of each payment included therein.
Thereafter the net amount of pensions disbursed by a Bank will be reimbursed to the Bank
by debit to the State Government account. A copy of the debit advice together with all the
copies of the scroll and certificates received from the Banks will be sent to the Treasury
Officer concerned.

8.1 Note:- The branch of the State Bank of India from which the link branch would
claim reimbursement will be the one dealing with the treasury which transferred the PPO to
the PSB.

8.2 Note:- The paying/reimbursing banks shall ensure that no excess reimbursement
is claimed/made. However if excess reimbursement is made to the paying banks, due to any
reason and the amount involved is less than Rs.1,000/- the same may be adjusted through
the pension payment scroll of the succeeding month, by the paying bank putting in a short
claim to the extent of the excess amount involved with suitable remarks.

Where, however, the amount excess reimbursed is Rs.1,000/- or more the
reimbursing banks may prepare immediately an error scroll for that amount for crediting the
excess to Government account and recovering the same from the bank to which excess
reimbursement had been made.

285
 Responsibilities of Treasury Officer:

9. On receipt of the copies of the scroll and the required certificates the Treasury
officer will check the correctness of the payments made by the Banks with reference to the
records maintained by him and thereafter incorporate the transaction in his accounts to be
submitted to the Accountant General alongwith original copy of the pension payment scroll
and related documents. The duplicate copy of the scroll will be retained by the Treasury.

9.1 The Treasury Officer will be responsible for accounting gross pension and
deductions towards income-tax while rendering accounts to the Accountant General.

9.2 On receipt of the treasury accounts, the Accountant General will adjust the
transactions in the usual manner.

Submission of periodical certificates by the pensioner:

10. The pensioners will be required to submit a life certificate once in a year in the
month of November under this scheme. The pensioner/Family pensioner will also be
required to furnish a non-employment or an employment/re-employment certificate once in a
year in the month of November. If the certificate indicates that pensioner/family pensioner is
re-employed/employed either permanently or temporarily in a Central/State Govt.
Department or is employed/re-employed/permanently absorbed in a Central or State
Government Company, Corporation, Undertaking or Autonomous body, Statutory body,
Local body, Co-operative Society, Institution etc. wholly or substantially owned or controlled
by the Central/State Government or in which the Government has substantial financial
interest or is receiving grant-in-aid from the Government to meet its administrative
expenditure or in Reserve Bank of India or in a Public Sector Bank or in GIC/LIC etc. during
the year ending October of that year, provisions of paragraph 13.5 will be enforced.

10.1 The life certificate will be signed by the Officers of the authorised Public Sector
Banks and Reserve Bank of India under this scheme.

10.2 In cases of widow recipient of family pension, certificate of re-marriage/non-
marriage will not be furnished by the recipient under this scheme. An undertaking from the
recipient shall be obtained by the paying branch to report promptly such an event to the
pension disbursing office. The certificate of non-marriage/re-marriage in other cases (i.e. by
an unmarried daughter or a widower recipient of family pension) will be furnished by the
recipient once in six months in May & November.

10.3 The forms of certificates referred to in para 10 & 10.2 are given in Annexure IV.

10.4 The Bank will indicate compliance of these requirements in the scroll sent to the
Treasury Officer.

Transfer of pension:

11. Application for transfer of pensions from one place to another may be of two
kinds.

(1) Transfer of pension from one branch of the paying bank to another of
the same bank at the same station or in the same district; or

(2) Transfer of pension from one place to another district of the State.

286
 11.1 Requests falling under category (1) above may be entertained by the P.S.B.
itself. The paying branch will indicate on the disburser’s portion of the PPO the month upto
which the payment has been made and will thereafter return the disburser’s portion of the
PPO to the link branch. On receipt the link branch will make necessary entries in the register
maintained by it in the form in Annexure III and forward the PPO (disburser’s portion) to the
other paying branch, under intimation to the district treasury, for making future pension
payments.

11.2 In a case falling under (2) above, the paying branch will return through its link
branch, both the portion of the PPO to the district treasury officer indicating the month upto
which pension payment has been made. On receipt, the district treasury officer will take
necessary action for payment of the pension at a branch of a PSB or the Treasury/Sub-
treasury as per pensioner’s request.

11.3 To avoid the risk of over-payment at the time of transfer, the following certificate
may be recorded on the PPO by the paying branch of the PSB.

“Certified that payment of pension upto the month of ................. has been made and
that this PPO consists of "--------- continuation sheets for recording disbursement.”

11.4 Except as provided for above, the transfer of a pension from one payment point
to another will not ordinarily be permitted.

Commutation of Pension:

12. On receipt of communication from the Director Pension/Accountant General
sanctioning commutation and indicating the revised rate of pension payable after
commutation the Treasury Officer will forward it under his seal, to the paying branch through
the link branch of the PSB for arranging payment. On receipt of the authority, the paying
branch will—

(i) arrange immediately payment of the commuted portion of the pension and
indicate in the related payment scroll against this item of payment the
Director Pension/Accountant General's letter of authority:

(ii) enter the date of commutation payment and date from which the reduced
pension is payable (as indicated in the commutation sanction) in the
disburser’s portion of the PPO (as well as on the pensioner’s portion of the
PPO at the earliest opportunity);

(iii) commence payment of reduced pension and simultaneously arrange
recovery of excess payment made if any, to the pensioner; and

(iv) advise the Treasury Officer through the link branch the date on which
payment of commuted portion of pension was made and the date from which
payment of reduced pension has commenced.

12.1 The link branch will also make appropriate entries in its records on the basis of
such intimation.

287
 Relief to Pensioners:

13. Whenever any increase in pension is sanctioned by the State Government,
adequate number of copies of the orders sanctioning this payment alongwith the ready
reckoner relating there to will be sent by the Finance Department direct to the Central
Offices and Regional/Local Head Offices of Public Sector Bank. These offices will in turn
make immediate arrangements for supplying copies of these orders to their respective
paying branches say within ten days for implementation. Each paying branch will promptly
determine the revised rates of increase in pension payable to the State Government Civil
pensioners under its payment. The calculation of these rates applicable to individual
pensioners would be made as per prescribed pro-forma and these will be noted in
disburser’s portions of PPOs alongwith their effective date (s) under the attestation by the
Branch Manager or Incharge before commencing payment of increase in pension at these
rates to the pensioners together with arrears, if any, due to them on this account. Copies of
order will also be forwarded to Reserve Bank of India.

13.1 The Statement showing the calculations of the revised rates in prescribed pro-
forma will be prepared in quadruplicate. First three copies thereof will be sent by the paying
branch to the concerned Treasury Officer/Pension Payment Officer (through its link branch)
for verification and return, the fourth being retained by it as an office copy. The Treasury
Officer/Pension Payment Officer will immediately check the calculation shown in the
statement and, wherever necessary indicate, in all the three copies the correct revised rates
of increase in pension in the ‘Remarks’ column of the statement under his attestation. He
will return the original copy of the statement duly checked and attested by him to the
payment branch through the link branch within two weeks of its receipt. The duplicate copy
will be sent by him to the Accountant General, while the triplicate, would be retained for his
record. The corrections if any, indicated by the Treasury Officer/Pension Payment Officer in
the ‘Remarks’ column of the verified statement will be noted urgently by the link branch in its
related records and it will then pass on that statement to the paying branch for similar action
being taken in respect of the disburser’s portion of the pension payment orders and other
concerned records. Thereafter, the paying branch will take steps to make subsequent
payment to the pensioners at the revised and verified rates and adjust any over/under
payment already made by it on the basis of the revised rates initially adopted for payment as
per para 13 above.

13.2 Whenever a paying branch is unable to work out the rates and process the
payments according to para 13 and 13.1 above, it will, on receipt of a copy of the orders
sanctioning increase in pension prepare a statement in triplicate immediately, covering all
the State Government Civil Pensioners under its payment in the same form as per
prescribed pro-forma but leaving blank column 8 and 10 thereof and send it immediately to
the Treasury Officer/Pension Payment Officer (through the link branch) for calculating the
revised rates of increase in pension. The Treasury Officer/Pension Payment Officer will work
out these rates and fill in columns 8 and 10 in all three copies under his attestation. He will,
within two weeks, return the original statement to the paying branch through the link branch
and send the duplicate to the Accountant General, keeping the triplicate for office record.
The link branch will transmit urgently the statement bearing the revised rates to the paying
branch after noting the same in its related records. On receipt of the completed statement
the paying branch will also note these revised entitlement in the disburser’s portions of the
PPOs. under the attestation of the Branch Manager or Incharge and proceed with the
payment of increase in pension to the pensioners at the revised rates, including arrear, if
any, payable to them on that account.

288
 13.3 The enhance-entitlement arising from the sanctioning of increases in pension
and their effective date (s) may be entered by the paying branch in the pensioner’s portions
of the PPOs. at their request, only after the same are verified/intimated by the Treasury
Officer/Pension Payment Officer.

13.4 Each link branch will be responsible for ensuring that——

(a) Copies of the orders sanctioning increase in pension have actually
been received by their paying branches; and

(b) Payment of increase in pension the revised rates to the pensioners
has been commenced by them without any undue delay.

They will also take up with the Treasury Officer/Pension Payment Officer cases if
any, where the verification or intimation of entitlement of increase in pension at the revised
rates has been delayed for more than one month, cases involving delays exceeding three
months will be brought to notice of the Accountant General for taking appropriate remedial
action with a copy to the Finance Department.

13.5 In the case of a pensioner/family pensioner who declare about his employment
/re-employment as per paragraph 10 the paying branch shall suspend payment of dearness
relief on pension/family pension from the day of such re-employment. The payment of
Dearness Relief will be re-started by the paying branch from the day following the day on
which the term of re-employment/employment comes to an end.

Arrears of pension on death of pensioner:

14. Pension can be drawn for the day of the pensioner’s death. On death of a
pensioner, the paying branch will receive death certificate of the pensioner and work out any
arrears due to the deceased or over-payment, if any, made to him. It will immediately take
action to recover the over payments from the deceased’s account for which Banks would
have obtained an undertaking from the pensioner as provided in paragraph 18 below. For
payment of any arrears to the heir of the deceased pensioner, the Bank will seek
instructions of the Director Pension/Accountant General through the Treasury.

Family Pension:

15. On receipt of intimation of death of the pensioner the paying branch of the Bank
will obtain the death certificate of the pensioner as well as an application in Annexure V for
payment of family pension and will commence payment of family pension at the rates
indicated by the Director Pension/Accountant General in the disburser’s portion of the PPO.
The paying branch will enter the date of death of the pensioner in the disburser’s portion of
the PPO and also make entries in the pensioner’s portion and in the register in form at
Annexure Ill.

15.1 Payment of family pension will be made by credit to Saving/Current account of
the recipient (not a “Joint” or either or “Survivor” account)which may be opened if the
recipient does not already have one additionally an undertaking similar to the one referred to
in paragraph 6 will be obtained by the paying branch from the recipient before the family
pension is paid.

15.2 The paying branch will also advise the Treasury Officer, through the link branch,

the date of the pensioner’s death and commencement of payment of family pension keeping
record under intimation to the Director Pension/Accountant General.

289
 Cessation of Pension:

16. When pension ceased to be payable to a pensioner recipient of a family pension
on death etc. the paying branch will make necessary entries in the PPO and its records and
return it to the Treasury Officer through the link branch. The latter will likewise amend its
records.

Renewal of Pension Payment Order:

17. Whenever a pension payment order is required to be renewed due to mutilation,
tearing and defacement, the paying branch may send the PPO to the Treasury Officer
through link branch for renewal and return. The paying branches will not be required to send
disburser’s portion of the PPOs to the Treasury Officer for renewal where all the pages for
recording disbursements have been used up; continuation sheets will be added by the
paying branches themselves. A suitable entry will be made by the paying branch on the
P.P.O. (disburser’s portion) whenever a continuation sheet is added specifying the number
of pages available on the sheet.

Indemnification by the Bank :

18. The Bank (s) will indemnify the Government against any wrong or over-payment
to pensioners and execute necessary indemnity bond being prescribed for the purpose. To
safeguard their own interests, the Bank (s) will obtain an undertaking from the pensioner
that excess payment credited to the accounts of the pensioners can be recovered by the
Bank. Such undertaking will be accepted by the Banks on plain papers.

Inspection/Audit of accounts, records and register by Accountant General or his
nominee or the Treasury/Sub-Treasury Officer:

19. The accounts, records and registers maintained in the paying branches of the
Bank (s) shall be open to Audit by the Accountant General or his nominee or the
Treasury/Sub-Treasury Officer.

19.1 The relevant provisions of the Rajasthan Treasury Manual may be deemed to
stand amended to the above extent.

20. Payment of pension to pensioners of other State Government :

20.1 The scope of the scheme is extended with effect from the pensions for the
month of April, 1982 (payable on or after 1st May, 1982) to cover the pensioners of Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, West Bengal, Orissa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Gujrat, U.P.,
Goa, Daman & Diu and Meghalaya, Maharashtra Governments including pensioners in
receipt of family pension who are drawing pension from any Treasury/Sub-Treasury in
Rajasthan or who want to draw pension in Rajasthan State. The procedure for the switch
over from the Treasury to the Bank for purpose of payment of pension will be the same as
prescribed in the relevant paragraphs of this scheme.

20.2 The payments made in the public sector Bank will be distinctly shown by the
Bank in the payment scrolls against the State Government to whom the payment is
debitable. The payment will, however, be initially taken against the cash balance of the
Rajasthan Government.

20.3 The payment made on behalf of other State Governments will be consolidated
by the Accountant General, Rajasthan with reference to the payment scrolls received
through the Treasury Officers and reimbursement of the amounts so paid shall be obtained
from the concerned Accountant General. The instructions for carrying out inter State
adjustments will be mutatis mutandis observed in this respect.

290
 “The Scheme for payment of pension to State Government pensioners through
authorised Public Sector Banks was introduced vide F.D. Order No.F.6(11)FD(R&AI)/76
dated 10.06.1977. It was envisaged at para 3 of the Appendix VI of the Scheme that
pension will not paid through a “Joint” or an “either or survivor” account. The pensioner
should open an account in his/ her sole name for the purpose.

2. The matter of payment of pension through Joint Bank account of pensioner with his/
her spouse was under consideration of the Government. After careful consideration it has
been decided to permit credit of pension into the joint account operated by pensioner with
his/ her spouse in whose favour an authorisation for family pension exists in the Pension
Payment Order (PPO). This facility would, however, be subject to the following terms and
conditions: -

(a) Once pension has been credited to a pensioner’s bank account, the liability of the
Government / Bank ceases. No further liability arises, even if the spouse wrongly
draws the amount.

(b) As pension is payable only during the life of a pensioner, his/ her death shall be
intimated to the bank at the earliest and in any case within one month of the demise,
so that the bank does not continue crediting monthly pension to the joint account with
the spouse, after the death of the pensioner. If, however, any amount has been
wrongly credited to the joint account, it shall be recoverable from the joint account
and / or any to her account, held by the pensioner / spouse either individually or
jointly. The legal heirs, successors, executors etc. shall also be liable to refund any
amount, which has been wrongly credited to the joint account.

(c) The provisions of Rule 59 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 relating
to “Nominations” would continue to be applicable to a joint account with the
pensioner’s spouse. This implies that if there is an ‘accepted nomination’ in
accordance with Rules 59(8) of these rules, arrears mentioned in the Rules shall be
payable to the nominee.

3 Existing pensioners desiring to get their pension credited to a joint account as
indicated above are required to submit an application to the branch bank, from where they
are presently drawing pension in the enclosed form. This would also be signed by the
pensioner’s spouse in token of having accepted the terms and conditions laid down in this
Office Order. These instruction are also applicable to the Government servants who will be
retiring after the issue of this Office Order.

4. Rule 3 of the existing scheme shall stand modified to the extent indicated above. The
requirement of annual life certification about the pensioner shall continue.

5. The authorised Public Sector Banks disbursing pension to the State Government
pensioners are requested to give wide publicity to the office order so that pensioners may
avail of this benefit.

1 Inserted vide FD order No. F.7(7)FD/R&A/94 dated 22.09.2006.

291
 To,

The Branch Manager,

(Bank)
(Branch)
(Address)
Sub.: - Payment of pension under PPO No. through your bank branch.
Dear Sir/ Madam,
| wish to receive my pension under PPO No. by getting it credited
to the saving / current bank account No. which is operated jointly in your
branch by me and my spouse, Mr. / Mrs. in whose favour an

authorisation for family pension exists in the Pension Payment Order (PPO).

| have read and understood the contents of the Government of Rajasthan, Finance
Department Order No. dated which contains the following
terms and conditions: Once pension has been credited to a pensioner's bank account,
liability of the Government/ Bank ceases. No further liability arises, even if the amount is
wrongly drawn by the spouse.

(a) As pension is payable only during the life of a pensioner, his/ her death shall
be intimated to the bank at the earliest and in any case within one month of
the demise, so that the bank does not continue crediting monthly pension to
the joint account with the spouse, after the death of the pensioner. If,
however, any amount has been wrongly credited to the joint account, it shall
be recoverable from the joint account and / or any other account held by the
pensioner/ spouse either individually or jointly. The legal heirs, successors,
executors etc. shall also be liable to refund any amount, which has been
wrongly credited to the joint account.

(c) The provisions of Rule 59 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996
relating to nominations would continue to be applicable to the joint account
with pensioner's spouse. Thus, if there is an ‘accepted nomination’ in
accordance with Rule 59(8) of these Rules, arrears mentioned in the Rules
shall be payable to the nominee.

| accepted the above terms and conditions. My spouse too, in token of having
accepted those terms and conditions, has put his/ her signature below.

1. Signature of Pensioner

2. Signature of Spouse”

292
 ANNEXURE |
Application for drawal of pension through Public Sector Banks
(To be submitted in duplicate)
To

The Treasury/Sub-Treasury Officer
(place)

जा, | opt to draw my pension through public sector bank and give below necessary
particulars to enable you to make arrangements in this regard—
1. Particulars of pensioner :-
(a) Name
(b) P.P.O. No.
(c) Present Address

2. Particulars of authorised PSB :
(a) Name

(b) Branch where payment desired

3. *Pensioner’s S.B./Current Account No. at the Branch to which pension is to
be credited.

Yours faithfully,

Place :
Date : (Pensioner)
*(Not ‘Joint’ or ‘Either or Survivor’ account etc.)
Pensioner’s Specimen Signature
FOR USE IN TREASURY
Forwarded to the Manager/Agent
(Link branch of PSB)

The disburser’s half / both halves of Shri / Smt/Kumari ...............------०--०-०--०-००----
bearing PPO [५०................... is/are sent herewith. The pensioner has been paid pension
for the period upto the month ०$......................-- Pension due from the month
Olesen is to be arranged by the Bank.

Treasury Officer,
(With his seal)

Station:

Date

293
 ANNEXURE II

Index Register of pension payment authorised
through branches of the Bank (s).

Name of the Pensioner No. of PPO Monthly amount of pension (basic
pension and relief to be shown
separately).

1 2 3

Branch at which the Date from which Remarks

payment is to be made pension payment
will commence.
4 5 6

di:

2.

3.

4.

Note :- Each entry should be attested by the nominated officer of the link branch of

the Bank (s).

294
 ANNEXURE III

Register of payment of pension

Name of the No. of the pension —_ Period for Amount of the
Pensioner payment order which the pension (basic
(PPO) pension is paid pension and relief

to be shown separately).

1 2 3 4
Recovery of Income-Tax Net amount Allocation of Remarks
over-payment deduction paid pension as
if any. indicated in
the PPO
5 6 7 8 9
1.
2.
3.
Note :- Each entry should be attested by the nominated officer of the branch at which

the payment is made.

295
 ANNEXURE IV
1. LIFE CERTIFICATE

Certified that | have seen the pensionel........... ........... -.......-.- ceeeeceeeee ००००-०० +-०---०-----
(Name of the Pensioner)

holder of Pension Payment Order No........ ........... ........--.--- and that he is alive on this date.

Place: Name

Date: Designation of Authorised
Officer (Seal)

Il. NON-EMPLOYMENT CERTIFICATE

a) | declare that | have not received any remuneration towards employment/re-
employment / absorption either permanently or temporarily in a Central/State Government
Department or a Central/State Government Company, Corporation, Undertaking
Autonomous body, Statutory body, Local Body, Co-operative Society, Institution etc. wholly
or substantially owned or controlled by the Central/State Government or in which the
Government 185 substantial financial interest or is receiving Grant-in-aid from the
Government to meet its administrative expenditure or in Reserve Bank of India or in a Public
Sector Bank or in GIC/LIC etc. during the year ended October, 19.................

b)* | declare that | have accepted commercial employment after obtaining
sanction of the Government (to be furnished by State Service Officers during first two year
from the date of retirement).

c)* | declare that | have/have not accepted any employment under any
Government outside India after obtaining/without obtaining sanction of the Government (to
be furnished by State Services Officers only)

Place:-

Dated: Signature

Name of

(* delete to whichever is not applicable)

296
 Ill. CERTIFICATE OF RE-MARRIAGE/NON-MARRIAGE

| hereby declare that | am not married/I have not been married during the past six
months.

OR

| hereby declare that | have not been re-married and undertake to report such an
event to the Treasury/Bank.

Place: Signature
Date: Name of the Pensioner
7?!?0.1५०.............................--

| certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that the above declaration is
correct.

Place: Signature of the responsible
Date: Officer or a well known person
10211 न न

Designation.......... ......-.------०------

297
 ANNEXURE V
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR FAMILY PENSION

Application for a family pension for the family of late Shri/Smt...

(Designation) ..................-----------०--०---- in the Office/Department of
1. Name of the applicant.
2. Relationship to the deceased

Government servant/pensioner.

3. Date of retirement, if the deceased
was a pensioner.

4. Date of death of Government
servant/pensioner.

5. Names and ages of surviving
kindred of the deceased.
Name Date of birth
Widow/Widower
Sons

Unmarried Daughters.

6. Name of Treasury/Sub-Treasury/
PSB branch at which payment is
desired.

ys Signature of left-hand thumb

impression (in the case of those
are not literate enough to sign
their names).

8. Descriptive roll of............
widow/widower/guardian of the
minor children of late........

(i) Date of birth
(ii) Height

(iii) Personal marks, if any on,
hand or face

(iv) Left-hand thumb & finger
impressions.
Small finger, Ring finger,
Middle finger, Index finger,
Thumb

298
 9. Full address of the applicant:

Attested by Witness
(1775 )
भर (2) _—-

Note:- The descriptive roll (column 8) and signature or left hand thumb and finger
impressions accompanying application for family pension should be in duplicate in
two separate sheets and attested by two gazetted officers or persons of
respectability in the town, village or pargana in which the applicant resides.

299
 ANNEXURE VI

RULES FOR THE PAYMENT OF PENSIONS TO
FREEDOM FIGHTERS AND THEIR DEPENDENTS THROUGH
PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS

The Government of Rajasthan have decided to extend the facility of drawal of
Pension through Public Sector Banks to Freedom Fighter Pensioners under the Rajasthan
State Freedom Fighters Rules, 1959 for which the following Rules are inserted in the
Scheme for payment of pension to Rajasthan Government Civil Pensioners by Public Sector
Banks viz. State Bank of India, State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, Bank of Baroda, Punjab
National Bank, Central Bank of India, United Commercial Bank, Union Bank of India, at the
places where the branches of these banks exist in the State:-

1. These Rules may be called ‘Payment of Pensions to Freedom Fighters and their
dependents through Public Sector Bank’s Rules, 1984’.

2. They shall come into force with effect from 1.4.1984.

3. These Rules will cover all Freedom Fighter Pensioners and their dependents
who have been sanctioned pension by the Government of Rajasthan as well as to those
who may by sanctioned pension here-after.

4. The pensioners who are desirous of availing of this facility will submit their
application (in duplicate) immediately to the Treasury Officer from whom they are currently
drawing their pension. The application form (Annexure-| to the existing scheme for Civil
Pensions) provides for furnishing of the following particulars by the pensioners:-

1. Name and address.

2. P.P.O. Number

3. Branch of the Public Sector Banks where payment is desired.
4. Savings/Current Account No.

5. The pensioners will have to open in their individual name Savings/Current
account in the Bank from where they wish to draw their pension. No bills will be required to
be submitted. The amount of monthly pension will be credited by the Public Sector Banks to
the pensioners individual Saving/Current account at the branch of their choice. Pensions will
not be payable in cash or into a “Joint” or an either or “Survivor” account under the scheme.

6. Personal identification has been done away with except for the first payment at
the Branch of the Public Sector Banks. The Pensioners would be required to furnish relevant
certificate as required under the scheme. The scheme would also cover payment of
dependent pension. The life certificate will be furnished by each pensioner each year in the
month of April in the proforma appended. The certificate shall be signed by the Officers of
the authorised Public Sector Banks and Reserved Bank of India.

7. No adhoc relief/increase in pension as admissible to other State Government
pensioners, is admissible to Freedom Fighter Pensioners.

8. The certificate of income, certificate about non-drawal of similar pension from any

other treasury in India and certificate about non-employment are not required under the
scheme.

300
 9. The Bank will prepare separate scroll for payments of pensions to Freedom
Fighters & their dependents.

10. In case, a living freedom fighter has not made any nomination, he may be
advised that the details of their nomination alongwith other documents & photograph,
affidavit etc., duly verified and attested from the District Magistrates shall be furnished to the
pension disbursing officer before entries are made in pension payment order.

Other provisions incorporated in F.D. Memo No.F.6(11)FD/R&AI/76 dated 10-06-
1977 wherein applicable will mutatis apply to the above pensioners also.

LIFE CERTIFICATE

Certified that | have seen the pensionel........... ........... .....-.--- --०------- "००५ +-०-०--०-----
(Name of the Pensioner)

holder of Pension Payment Order No........ ........... .........------ and that he is alive on this date.
Place: Name
Date: Designation of Authorised

Officer (Seal)

301
 APPENDIX VII

Rules regulating the incidence of Pay, Allowances, Pension etc. between the
Rajasthan Government and the Central Government and other State Governments and vice
versa.

|- ON DEPUTATION
1. While on deputation.-

The incidence of leave salary and pension contribution etc. of Government servants
on deputation to the Central Government or other State Governments and vice versa, shall
be as under:

(i) The liability for leave salary will be borne in full by the Department from which the
Government servant proceeds on leave whether it be his parent Department or a borrowing
Department with whom he is on deputation.

The system of allocation or sharing of the liability on account of leave salary
contribution by State Government to Central Government or vice versa or by State
Government to other State Governments or vice versa as prevalent so far, shall be
dispensed with.

(ii) The liability for pension including gratuity will be borne in full by the Central/State
Government to which the Government servant permanently belongs at the time of
retirement. No recovery of proportionate pension will be made from Central/State
Government under whom he has served.

(iii) The liability for Government contributions towards Contributory Provident Fund will
be borne by the parent Department of the Central or State Government and no share of
contributions will be recovered from the borrowing Department.

(iv) In lieu of Central Government's liability towards pension of State Government
officers (mainly All India Service Officers) who are deputed to Centre for varying spell’s, an
adhoc grant shall be paid by the Central Government to the State Government at the
beginning of the year in one lump sum as Grant in aid (Non Plan).

Il-On permanent Transfer

(a) Permanent employees.

2. Arrangements with Central Government.-

The incidence of pension including gratuity in respect of permanent employees
transferred permanently to Central Government or vice versa shall be borne in full by the
Central/State Government to which the Government servant permanently blongs at the time
of retirement. No recovery of proportionate pension will be made from the Central/State
Government under whom he has served.

3. Arrangements with State Governments.-
The provisions contained in para 2 above shall also be applicable in case of those

State Governments who mutually agree to the same.

302
 (At present the Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Karnatka, Maharashtra, Gujrat,
Punjab, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu,Kerala, Assam, West Bengal, Utter Pradesh &
Orissa have agreed to these arrangements).

(b) Permanent employees through open competition.
4. Arrangements with Central Government.-

Where a Government servant is appointed to a post through Open competition
and-

(i) he is not required to resign his previous appointment; and

(ii) the Government under whom he was employed prior to his appointment through
open competition agree to retain his lien until he is finally absorbed by the latter
Government; the rules relating to incidence of pension including gratuity as given in para 2
above shall also apply.

5. Arrangements with State Governments.-

The arrangements contained in para 4 above shall also be applicable in case of
those State Governments who mutually agree to these provisions.

(At present Karnataka, Maharashtra, Bihar and Assam Governments have agreed to
these arrangements.)

(c) Temporary employees.
6. Arrangements with Central Government :-

(1) Pensionary liability in respect of the following categories of employees for the
service rendered under the Central Government, to the extent such service would have
qualified for grant of pension under the rules of Central Government, will be borne in full by
the State Government if such Government servant is permanent under the State
Government at the time of retirement:-

(a) In respect of employees who while holding temporary post under the Central
Government applied for the post under the State Government through proper
channel/with proper permission of Administrative Authority concern.

(b) Those who having been retrenched from the service of the Central
Government secured on their own, employment under StateGovernment
either with or without interruption between the date of retrenchment and date
of new appointment;

(2) The gratuity, if any, received by the aforesaid Government employee for
temporary service under the Central Government will have to be refunded by him to that
Government. No recovery of proportionate pension will be made from the Central
Government under whom he had served prior to securing post under the State Government.

(3) The benefit under para (1) above would however not be available to those
Government servants who applied for post under the State/Central Government direct
without permission of the Administrative Authority concerned and resigned the previous post
to join the new appointment under the State/Central Government.

303
 (4) Where an employee in category 1(a) above is required for administrative reasons
for satisfying a technical requirement, to tender resignation from the temporary post held by
him before joining the new appointment, a certificate to the effect that such resignation had
been tendered for administrative reasons and/or to satisfy a technical requirement, to join
with proper permission, the new posts, may be issued by the authority accepting the
resignation. An entry of this certificate may be made in his Service Book. Such a certificate
will entitle the Government servant to get the benefit envisaged in this rule.

(5) The arrangement envisaged in this rule shall also be similarly applicable in case
an employee of Rajasthan Government is appointed to the Central Government.

7. Arrangement with other State Government:-

The arrangements envisaged in para 6 above shall also be applicable in respect of
those State Governments who mutually agree on reciprocal basis in respect of temporary
service and subject to the conditions laid down therein.

(At present the Government of Gujrat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra,

Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh andGoa have agreed to the above
arrangements.)

304
 APPENDIX VIII

INSTRUCTIONS FOR HEAD OFFICE/DEPARTMENT FOR TIMELY
FINALISATION OF PENSION CASES.

A - ACTION BY APPOINTING AUTHORITIES : -

(1) Preparation of list of Government servants due for retirement within next 24 to 30
months, to be prepared six monthly in January and July each and forwarding the same to
the Director, Pension Department, alongwith copies of Head of offices concerned for further
action for preparation of pension cases and ascertaining/clearing of dues.

(2) Issue of retirement order one year in advance of the date of retirement of the
Government servant individually, in form 6 to R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996. (See GRD
below Rule 78).

The order should contain a certificate of “No Departmental Enquiry under rule 16 of
C.C.A. Rules is pending” or otherwise.

(3) In case the Government servant to be retired is an officiating Government
servant, issue a certificate for counting officiating pay for emoluments under Rule 45 (note
3) that the appointment has not been made in leave vacancy or to hold additional charge of
the post, in form 32, one year in advance and forward the same to the Head of office to
record it in the service Book of the Government servant concerned.

If the officiating appointment is ordered after issue of the retirement order, the
required certificate may be sent to the Head of Office immediately after the appointment is
made.

(4) If after issue of retirement order, or no D.E. certificate, or officiating appointment
certificate, there is any event having a bearing on the amount of pension, immediately
inform the Head Office concerned, Director Pension Department, Pension Disbursing
Authority etc. (See rule 83 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules , 1996).

8 - HEAD OF DEPARTMENT : -

(1) Action as at A (1) above about preparation of list of Government servants due to
retire within next 24 to 30 months.

(2) Monitoring of disposal of pension cases and following of calendar prescribed for
preparation of the same, as prescribed in GRD 3 below Rule 93.

Form 26 (Statements 1 to 4), of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.
C - HEAD OF OFFICE.-

(1) Verification of the service rendered by a Government servant and intimation of
the same to him in Form 24 in case he has completed 25 years of service or 5 years are left
to his retirement, as required under rule 29 of Pension Rules, to be issued in consultation
with the senior most member of the Rajasthan Accounts Service posted in the Department.

Two years before the date of retirement:

(2) Undertaking the work of preparation of pension papers in Form 7.

305
 (3) Obtaining of application or certificate in Form 27 or 27 A from the Government
servant for No Demand Certificate in respect of Government accommodation.

(4) Forwarding Form 27 with a list of retiring Government servants to the Directorate
of Estates/Public Works Department, for needful.

(5) Obtaining of application or certificate in Form 28 or 28A from the Government
servant for No Dues Certificate in respect of long term advances.

(6) Forwarding Form 28 alongwith a list of retiring Government servants to the
concerned Treasury Officer for needful.

(7) Undertaking verification of Service by scrutinising the Service Book and records-

(i)

(i)

See that certificates of verification for the entire service are recorded in the
Service Book or not.

In respect of unverified portion (s) of Service-

(a) Verify with reference to Pay Bills, acquaintance roll and other relevant
records;

(b) Refer to other Heads of Offices if the period of unverified service
relates to that Office;

(c) In cases other than those covered in (a) and (b) above, ask the
Government servant if he so desires, to file a written statement in
Form 9 alongwith all available documents and information;

(d) On satisfaction, issue orders for admitting the service in cases
covered in (c) above, in Form 9 and record entries in the Service
Book.

(8) Identify any other omission, deficiency or imperfection in the Service Book having
a direct bearing on determination of Emoluments and Service qualifying for pension.

(9) In case of Gazetted Government servants appointed before 31.12.1974, see that
the History of Service issued by the Accountant General is either attached with the Service
Book in original or pasted on the Service Book.

(10) Determination of Emoluments for pension.-

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

If fixation of pay in various pay scales is outstanding, it should be got
expedited.

Obtain a certificate in the Service Book from the senior accounts personnel in
the Office that all the fixations made from time to time are correct and the pay
being drawn is also correct.

In case the Government servant is an officiating Government servant, record
a certificate in the Service Book after obtaining the same from the Appointing
Authority that the officiating appointment has not been made in leave vacancy
or to hold additional charge, for counting officiating pay for Pension, as
required under note 3 to Rule 45 in form 32 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.

(11) Date of birth-

(i)
(ii)

See that the Date of birth is properly recorded in the Service Book;

Any alteration in the date of birth recorded bears the approval of the
competent authority and a copy of the order is available in Personal File:

306
 (iii) Ensure that there is no change in the date of birth after 31.12.1978, without
Government's approval.

(iv) If the appointment has been made at advanced age, i.e. overage, obtain
approval of the Government under rule 8 of Rajasthan Service Rules, if not
already done.(Pension case however need not be held up for want of this
approval, vide F.D. Order No.F.1(77) FD(Gr.2)/69 dated 15.9.1975).

(12) Foreign Service.-

(i) If the Government servant was on foreign service, whether the pension
contribution has been received from the borrowing authority and entry to this
effect made in the Service Book by the Director, Pension Department.

(ii) If the period of foreign service is such where the pension contribution is to be
paid by the Government servant himself, ensure that he has deposited the
same and entry in the Service Book made by the Director Pension Deptt.

(13) Suspension.-

In case the Government servant has been reinstated after suspension, entry to the
affect whether the suspension period will count for qualifying service or not, has been made
in the Service Book mentioning Order Number and date.

(14) Extra Ordinary Leave.-

If Extraordinary Leave is taken on Medical Certificate, or for Higher Studies or due to
Civil Commotion/natural calamities, orders of the competent authority counting the leave
period for pension are recorded in the Service Book giving reference of Order Number and
date.

(15) Action to expedite regularisation of the period of service, if any, under
consideration which will have material effect on the determination of qualifying service, may
be taken.

(16) Examine if there is any interruption in Service resulting in forfeiture of past
service. Take steps for condonation, if the same is reasonable and covered under the rules.

(17) In case the retiring employee was a work charged employee before
absorption/appointment to regular post in the Government, option in Form 4A opting for
pension in lieu of CPF benefits is pasted in the Service Book.

Entry to the effect that employer's share of CPF balance has been deposited in the
Government Account and Transfer Entry passed by the State Insurance/Provident Fund
Department, has been recorded in the Service Book.

(18) Obtain nomination for Retirement/Death gratuity in Form 1 or 2 in case it is not
already obtained. Make an entry in the Service Book as per Rule 59 of RCS (Pension)
Rules, 1996.

(19) Whether details of Family in Form 3 have been pasted in the Service Book and
whether subsequent changes notified if any have been recorded.

(20) One year before the date of retirement:-

Obtain copy of retirement orders and no D.E. certificate from the Appointing
Authority, if not received by then.

307
 (21) Eight months before the date of retirement:-

(i)

(ii)

Obtain Form 5 and Form 5 A (in triplicate) from the Government servant, duly
completed, as required under Rule 81 of Pension Rules.

Obtain three copies of specimen signature; joint photograph duly
attested; slips showing particulars of height, personal identification marks
duly attested; address etc.

Action under para C points (2) to (21) to be completed eight months prior to
the date of retirement.

(22) Six months before the date of retirement:-

(i)

(i)
(iii)
(iv)
(५)
(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

Complete Part | of Form 7

Forward the pension papers to the Director, Pension Department, Form 5, 5A
and 7 alongwith a covering letter in Form 8, Service Book and other
documents mentioned therein.

Ensure sending of all enclosures and documents as mentioned in Form 7 and
Form 8 of Pension Set.

Obtain a declaration from the Government servant giving his consent for
recovery of dues, if any, from pension or retirement gratuity.

Retain a Copy of set of pension papers with enclosures sent to the Director,
Pension Department.

Retain an attested copy of P.L. Account for grant of encashment benefits at
the time of retirement.

Obtain application from the Government Servant in Form | to Commutation
Rules, if the Government servant desires to commute a portion of pension
without medical examination.

Obtain nomination for the payment of arrears and commutation of pension, if
the Government servant desires to submit, under Nomination Rules, 1996

(23) Two months before the date of retirement:-

Furnish particulars of Government dues or no dues against the retiring Government
servant to the Director, Pension Department as required under rule 85, after ascertaining
and assessing them as per rule 92 of R.C.S.(Pension) Rules, 1996.

(24) Six months before and upto the date of retirement:-

Send immediate intimation to the Director, Pension Department, of any event having
a bearing on the amount of pension, after forwarding of pension papers. In case, PPO/GPO
has already been issued, ensure servicing a copy of the above intimation to the Pension
Disbursing Authority also.

(25) Immediately on retirement: -

(i)

Issue a Final Last pay Certificate, endorsing it to the Director, Pension
Department. Also give a copy of the same to the retiring Government servant
for his future record.

308
 (ii) If the Government servant is likely to or have retired before his pension and
gratuity or both have not been finally assessed and settled, whether pension
papers have been prepared and sent to the Director, Pension or not and if
sent, they have been returned by him with objection, then invoke the
authority vested in you under rule 86 of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, and
sanction 100% provisional pension and 75% or 20% provisional retirement
Gratuity, as the case may be, after assessing the qualifying service and
emoluments by most careful summary investigation and after following the
procedure laid therein.

D - IN CASE OF DEATH OF A GOVERNMENT SERVANT WHILE IN SERVICE :-

(26) On receipt of intimation of death of a Govt. Servant: -

(i) Ascertain whether any death gratuity or family pension is payable;

(ii) If death gratuity is payable, ascertain the person or persons to whom the
gratuity is payable;

(iii) Address the person (s) concerned in Form 10 or 11 for making a claim in
Form 12.

(iv) Address the person concerned to whom family pension is payable in Form 13
asking her/him to make a claim in Form 14.

(v) Address the Directorate of Estates/P.W.D for issue of No Demand Certificate,
in case Government accommodation was in occupation of the deceased
Government servant.

(vi) Address the Treasury officer concerned for issue of No demand Certificate in
case of long term advances.

(vii) | Undertake completion of Form 18

(viii) Service verification and determination of emoluments shall be completed
within one month’s time of the receipt of intimation regarding death of the
Government servant and the amount of family Pension and Death Gratuity
shall be calculated accordingly by complying procedure laid down in Rules 96
and 97.

(27) On receipt of claim in Form 14, forward Form 18 and 14 with a covering letter in
Form 19 to the Director, Pension alongwith the Service Book duly completed and any other
documents, within a month of receipt of claim. Form 18 may be forwarded even if the claim
is not received.

(28) Ascertain and assess Government dues in terms of Rule 101 and draw the
attention of the Director, Pension, to the same and the amount of gratuity to be withheld for
adjustment of Government dues not assessed so far.

(29) Sanction Provisional Family Pension on receipt of the claim with necessary
documents, after most careful summary investigations.

(30) After forwarding pension papers to the Director, Pension Department, also

sanction for payment of provisional gratuity (75%) in accordance with Rule 99(2) of
Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.

309
 APPENDIX IX

GRANT OF PRO RATA RETIREMENT BENEFITS TO GOVERNMENT
SERVANTS PERMANENTLY TRANSFERRED TO PUBLIC
SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS, AUTONOMOUS BODIES, ETC.

SECTION I- Permanent Transfer of Rajasthan Government Servants to the State Public

Sector Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies.

SECTION II - Conversion of Government Department/Office into a State Autonomous Body
or Public Sector Undertaking.

SECTION Ill - Transfer of State Government employees to Central Autonomous Bodies/
Statutory Bodies, and vice-versa.

SECTION IV - Formats.

SECTION V - Transfer of State Government employees to public enterprise under the
control of the Government of India.

310
 SECTION |

Permanent Transfer of Rajasthan government
Servants to the State Public Sector Undertakings
and Autonomous Bodies and Vice Versa.

The question of granting terminal benefits to the Rajasthan Government servants
going over to the State enterprise/Autonomous Bodies and vice versa on immediate
absorption basis has been under consideration of the Government and it has been decided
that the appointment of Government servants in the State public enterprises/autonomous
bodies and vice versa will henceforth be on following terms and conditions:-

(1) Release of the Government servants for appointment in the enterprises/bodies

(i) A Government servant who has been selected for post in a State public
enterprise/autonomous body will be required to give his/her technical
resignation before his relief from Government. The Government servant may
thereafter be relieved by the respective Department to take up appointment in
the PSU/autonomous body. The relieving order should indicate the period
within which the Government servant should join the Public Sector
Undertaking/Autonomous Body. Normally this period should not be more than
15 days. This period may be extended by the competent authority for reasons
beyond the control of the official.

(ii) The period between the date of relief and the date of joining PSU/
autonomous body can be regulated by grant of leave due and admissible
and if no leave is due, by grant of extraordinary leave. The case of grant of
retirement benefits/leave should be processed only after ascertaining from
the PSU/autonomous body as to whether the Government servant had
actually joined them. Thereafter, the necessary notification/orders accepting
the resignation of the Government servant from Government service from the
actual date of his/her joining the PSU/autonomous body should be issued.
Specimen of the relieving order to be made use of is given in Annexure | at
the end of this Section.

(2) Retention of lien

No lien of the Government servant concerned will be retained in his parent cadre. All
his connections with the Government will be severed on his release for appointment in an
enterprise/body and he will not be allowed to revert to his parent cadre.

(3) Pay Fixation

A Government servant selected for a post in a State public enterprise/autonomous
body will be free to negotiate his emoluments with the enterprise/body. On appointment to a
post in a public sector enterprise/autonomous body on immediate absorption basis, a
Government servant will be at par with other employees of the enterprise/body and will be
governed by the rules of the enterprise/body in all respects.

(4) Pensionary benefits

(i) Resignation from Government service with a view to secure employment in a
State public enterprise/ autonomous body with proper permission will not
entail forfeiture of the service for the purpose of retirement/ terminal benefits.
In such cases, the Government servant concerned shall be deemed to have
retired from service from the date of such resignation and shall be eligible to

311
 (E)

receive all retirement/terminal benefits as admissible under the relevant rules
applicable to him in his parent organisation.

Pension and gratuity:-

A Government servant eligible for pension and selected/absorbed in a State
enterprise/autonomous body having a pension scheme should exercise an
option within six months of the date of his resignation, for either of the
following two alternatives:-

(a) either to count the service rendered under the Rajasthan Government
for pension in public sector undertaking/autonomous body.

(b) or to receive pro rata retirement benefits for the service rendered
under the Rajasthan Government.

The option shall be exercised in writing. The option once exercised shall be
final. In case no option is exercised within the stipulated period the
Government servant will be deemed to have opted in favour of sub clause (a)
above.

In case the Government servant opts in favour of sub-clause (a) of clause (A)
above, he will be eligible to draw pension in accordance with the rules of the
Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body (organisation) for the combined
service under the Rajasthan Government and that under the Public Sector
Undertaking/Autonomous Body (organisation) on his final retirement from that
body. If he resigns from service of the Public Sector Undertaking/A.B.
(organisation), his resignation will be treated as resignation from Rajasthan
Government service entailing forfeiture of past service including that under
the Government and consequent loss of pensionary benefits for the
combined service.

In case the Government servant opts in favour of sub clause (b) of clause
(A), he will have further option which will also have to be exercised along with
the option referred to in clause (A) above :-

(a) either to receive pro rata monthly pension,
(b) or to receive a lump sum amount in lieu of monthly pension.

In case no specific option is indicated by him in this behalf, he will be deemed
to have opted in favour of sub clause (a) of this clause.

In the event of his option in favour of sub-clause (a) of clause (C), he will
draw pro rata pension and retirement gratuity for the service rendered under
the Government. He will also be eligible to commute upto one-third of his
pension.

If he opts in favour of sub clause (b) of clause (C), he will receive lump sum
amount in lieu of pro rata pension; in addition to the retirement gratuity. The
lump sum amount will be calculated by applying the commutation table under
the R.C.S. (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996, applicable on the date of
his cessation of service under the Government. The commutation shall be
subject to medical examination. The pension so commuted shall not be
restored at any stage.

The provisions of option under clauses (C), (D) and (E) shall also apply to
a Government servant selected for appointment/absorption in a Public Sector
Undertaking/ Autonomous Body having no pension scheme.

Calculation of pro rata retirement benefits:-

312
 NOTE: -

(H)

(1)

(४)

(K)
(5) Leave

The retirement gratuity and pro rata pension will be calculated in accordance
with the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.

The benefit of the scheme of voluntary retirement as embodied in Rules 50 to
52 of the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, will not be admissible in such cases.

Date of payment of pro rate retirement benefits: -

The amount of retirement gratuity and lump sum amount in lieu of pension
wherever opted will be payable immediately after the date of his permanent
absorption/date of resignation. The amount of pro rata monthly pension
wherever applicable will also be payable from the date following the date of
cessation of service under the Rajasthan Government.

Limitation as to the total amount of gratuity:-

The total gratuity admissible in respect of the service rendered under the
Government of Rajasthan and that under the Public Sector Undertaking/
Autonomous Body shall not exceed the amount that would have been
admissible, had the Government servant continued in Government service
and retired on the same pay which he drew on retirement from Public Sector
Undertaking/ Autonomous Body.

Effect of Liberalisation of Pension/Gratuity Rules after absorption:-

Any further liberalisation of pension/gratuity rules decided upon by the
Government of Rajasthan in respect of its employees after the permanent
absorption/date of resignation of a Rajasthan Government servant to join
PSU/Autonomous Body,will NOT be extended to him in case he has opted to
receive a lump sum amount in lieu of pension and the permanent
absorption/resignation has taken place from a date prior to the date from
which rationalisation/ liberalisation in pension rules has been given effect to
by the Rajasthan Government.

A Government servant who opts for pro rata monthly pension on his
resignation from Government service will not be entitled to Dearness Relief/
Interim Relief on pension during his service in public sector enterprise/
autonomous body.

A Government servant taking up an appointment in a State public enterprise will be
entitled to encashment of privilege leave to his credit at the time of acceptance of his
resignation from Government service, subject to a limit of 240 days. Half pay leave will stand

forfeited.

(6) Family Pension

The family pension entitlements will be regulated as under:-

(A)

(i) The Government servant shall have an option to be governed either by
the Family Pension Scheme of the Rajasthan Government or by that of
the Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous Bodies, BUT NOT BOTH.
However, the benefit of Family Pension Scheme of the Rajasthan
Government will be available only to such of the Government servants
who are permanent and have a qualifying service of not less than ten
years; and

(ii) the liability of the Rajasthan Government in this regard will be frozen as
on the date of permanent absorption/resignation of the individual
employees; that is to say, the amount of family pension payable will be

313
 calculated with reference to the pay drawn and the rules in force on the
date of permanent absorption/resignation.

(B) The employees who opt for the Family Pension Scheme of the Rajasthan
Government will have to seek exemption from the operation of the provisions
of the Employees’ Family Pension Scheme, 1971, under Section 17(1-C) of
the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952,
wherever necessary. For this purpose, the concerned employees should
submit a formal application for exemption to the Central Provident Fund
Commissioner through their employers, i.e. the concerned Public Sector
Undertakings/ Autonomous Bodies.

NOTE:- The family will not be eligible for any benefit under the family pension
scheme of the Rajasthan Government if the Government servant is not
permanent and also does not have a qualifying service of not less than ten
years, on the date of absorption.

(7) Benefits after permanent absorption.-

For the period of service rendered in a public sector undertaking/autonomous body
from the date of absorption, the absorbed employees will be entitled to all the benefits
admissible to other corresponding employees of the organisation and continue to be
governed by its rules in all respects.

(8) Provident Fund.-

The amount of subscription towards the General Provident Fund together with
interest thereon standing to the credit of the employee in the G.P.F. Account shall not be
paid to him but shall be transferred, with the consent of that body, to his new Provident Fund
Account under that body.

In cases where the corporate bodies do not have any Provident Fund Scheme or
whose Provident Fund Rules do not provide for the acceptance of balance from other
Provident Funds, the amount in question should be finally paid to the person concerned at
the time of his permanent transfer to such a body. Once such a transfer of Provident Fund
balance has taken place, the concerned employee will be subject to the Provident Fund
Rules of the organisation and not the Provident Fund Rules of the Government of
Rajasthan.

(9) Procedure for drawal of pro rata retirement benefits.-

(i) Since the Government servants are deemed to have retired from Government
service on the date of absorption, the procedure laid down in Chapter VI of
R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, which applies to Government servants who
retire in normal course, should mutatis mutandis apply in the case of
Government servants who are absorbed in a public sector undertaking or in
an autonomous body. The disbursement of the retirement benefits should be
authorised from the date indicated in Government’s letter allowing the
Government servant to be absorbed in public sector undertaking or
autonomous body.

(ii) In respect of both gazetted and non-gazetted employees, Form 7 of R.C.S.
(Pension) Rules, 1996, should be filled in by the Head of Office and
forwarded to the Director, Pension Department, for determining final amount
of pension and retirement gratuity. Where the retirement benefits are payable
from the date of absorption, the Head of Office should obtain the particulars
required under Form 5 and Form 5A and forward the same to the Director,
Pension Department, alongwith the pension papers. The Director, Pension

314
 (iii)

(iv)

NOTE:-

after applying the necessary checks, will inform the absorbed employee,
autonomous body/public sector undertaking and the Head of Office of the
amount of pension and Retirement Gratuity and the date from which they are
payable to him.

The procedure laid down in Chapter VI of R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, may
be adopted keeping in view the position stated in this Section. The provisions
contained in Chapter VI for authorising payment of provisional pension and
three fourth of the Retirement Gratuity by the Head of Office need not be
observed in the case of an absorbed employee. Payment of the retirement
benefits will be received by the employee concerned from the treasury of his
own choice.

In the case of Government servants who opt for the alternative (a) of para (4)
(ii) (C) above, the payment of monthly pension will commence from the due
date pending their medical examination in accordance with the provisions of
the R.C.S. (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996. The commutation shall
become absolute and the title to receive the commuted value shall accrue on
the date on which the Medical Board (Authority) signs the medical certificate.
If the Medical Board (Authority) directs that the age of the employee for the
purpose of commutation shall be assumed to be greater than his actual age,
the person concerned will have the opportunity to change his option for
receiving a lump sum in lieu of monthly pension to receiving the monthly
pension by written notice despatched within two weeks from the date on
which he receives intimation of the finding of the Medical Board (Authority). If
the applicant does not change his option within the period of two weeks
prescribed above, he shall be assumed to have accepted the findings of the
Medical Board (Authority).

The reduction in the amount of pension on account of commutation shall be
operative from the date of receipt of the commuted value of pension or at the
end of three months after issue of authority by the Director, Pension, for the
payment of commuted value of pension, whichever is earlier under the R.C.S.
(Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996.

The pensionary liability in cases of absorbed employees who opt for counting
the service rendered under the State for pension in Public Sector
Undertaking/ Autonomous Body, will be allocated on the basis of length of
service. The Government of Rajasthan would discharge their liability by
payment of capitalised value of their share of pension together with the share
of gratuity, if any, to the autonomous organisation on retirement of the officer
from the service of such an organisation. Similar procedure should apply in
the event of death of an officer while in service of the autonomous
organisation. In other cases Government's liability will be discharged by way
of payment of pro rata retirement benefits for the part of service rendered
under the Government before absorption.

(10) Procedure for payment of family pension.-

(i)

In the case of normal retirement, family pension to the spouse is authorised in
the PPO for service pension itself but in the case of retirement on absorption
in an autonomous body or a public sector undertaking where the person
absorbed has opted to receive that lump sum amount in lieu of full pension,
no PPO for service pension is required to be issued. In such cases only a
report on the admissibility of family pension will be sent by the Director
Pension Department to the concerned Department in which he was serving

315
 before absorption, the public sector undertaking/autonomous body in which
absorbed and the Government servant concerned.

(ii) In the case of Government servants who have opted for Rajasthan
Government family Pension Scheme, the Administrative Department on
receipt of death report from the beneficiary will send the necessary intimation
to the Director, Pension Department and the latter will issue the PPO for
family pension. In case the person concerned had opted for the family
pension scheme of the organisation concerned where he was permanently
absorbed, it will be the duty of that organisation concerned to initiate action
for authorising family pension and the Director, Pension Department,
Rajasthan, will not come in the picture.

(iii) It will be the responsibility of the pension sanctioning authority to process the
claim for family pension, forwarding to the Director, Pension Department, for
issue of an authority after satisfying itself that the person concerned had
opted for Rajasthan Government Family Pension Rules and has sought
exemption from the Central Provident Fund Commissioner, where necessary.

NOTE.- Under Section 10(10-A) (i) of Income Tax Act, 1961 both the commuted
value of one-third of pension referred to in (D) and the terminal benefits
referred to in (E) of para 4 above, are exempt from income tax. (Central
Board of Direct Taxes, Circular 286 F.174/79/80-ll (Al), dated the 17th
November, 1980, circulated under 5.1. M.H.A. (DP&AR) O.M.No.4(1)-PU/81,
dated the 28th August, 81. This note is an extract from C.C.S. (Pension)
Rules, 1972-Section Il of Appendix 12, 1993 edition of Swami’s Compilation
of Pension Rules.

(11) For the purpose of these instructions immediate absorption means acceptance of
resignation of a Government servant from Government service to enable him to take up an
appointment in a Rajasthan Public enterprise/autonomous body for which he had applied
with proper permission.

(12) Since the terminal benefits mentioned above are admissible only to those
Government Servants who leave Government service to secure employment in the
enterprise/body with proper permission, a case of grant of these benefits may be processed
only after ascertaining from the enterprise concerned that the Government servant has
actually joined them.

(13) The stipulation of ‘immediate absorption’ will apply to all appointments of Rajasthan
Government servants in the Rajasthan public enterprises/autonomous bodies, irrespective
of the level of appointment, the mode of recruitment, and whether an appointment is in
public interest or otherwise.

(14) For the purpose of these orders -

(i) a State public enterprise is an undertaking wholly or substantially owned by
the Government of Rajasthan and which is accepted as such by the
Rajasthan Bureau of Public Enterprises;

(ii) a State Autonomous Body is generally a non-profit making organisation
which is financed wholly or substantially from cess or State Government
grants. “Substantially” means that more than 50% of the expenditure of the
autonomous body is met through cess or State Government grants. An
autonomous body may be a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 or a statutory body or a State University having its own
governing council whose memorandum of association/by-laws, etc., contain

316
 provision for complying with Government directives for carrying out its
business in achieving the objectives for which the organisation is established.

(15) | The terminal benefits enumerated in paras (1) to (6) above will be admissible to all
Rajasthan Government servants, who secure appointments to State Public Sector
enterprises/autonomous bodies, with proper permission. A Government servant selected for
appointment in an enterprise on the basis of an application submitted by him before joining
the Government service will be deemed to have applied with proper permission for the
purpose of these orders.

(16) All cases of grant of pensionary benefits, etc., to Government servants, who are
appointed in the State Public Sector Enterprises/Autonomous Bodies, on immediate
absorption basis, shall be decided by the Administrative Departments. Cases of doubtful
nature shall be referred to the Finance Department.

(17) 11656 orders will, however, not be applicable in the cases of those Government
servants whose Departments have been converted into a State Autonomous Body or a
State Public Sector Undertaking. Their cases are covered by different sets of orders on the
subject (vide Section Il).

(18) Permanent transfer of employee of the State Public Sector Undertaking and
Autonomous Bodies to Rajasthan Government.

An employee of State Enterprise/Autonomous Body having pensionary scheme if
joins Government service on immediate absorption basis the relevant provisions contained
in para 1 to 17 above shall also be applicable on reciprocal basis in respect of employees of
those State Public Enterprise/ Autonomous Body who mutually agrees for the same.

NOTE - Format to be used for sanction of pro rata retirement benefits on absorption in

State Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Bodies, are available in Section
IV of this Appendix.

317
 ANNEXURE |

(See Para 1(i)(ii))

RELIEVING ORDER

Shri
hereby relieved to join .......................-------- a
(ili) ........------०-०--०-००---०-०---- on permanent absorption basis. He should join ..............
(ii) DY. esos (४) oncom His resignation from

and it will be notified on the receipt of intimation about the date of his
joining 1 1 नि न मम rererer eee In case for some reason he does not

join (ii) »-०0%..........------०--०--०-०----- (IV) ..........-----०--०-०--०----०----
he should report back to this office forthwith.

2. The period between the date of relief and the date of joining in .................--------०-----
(it) sexe .... Will be regularised by grant of any type of leave
due and if no leave is at credit, by extraordinary leave.

(i) The name of the officer.
(ii) The name of the public sector undertaking/autonomous body.

(iii) The post against which the officer is to be appointed in the public sector
undertaking/autonomous body.

(iv) The Department should indicate the date by which the officer should join the
public sector undertaking/autonomous body. This date will be determined by
giving him a maximum of 15 day’s time from the date of relief. The competent
authority in the Administrative Department may allow any further extension
beyond this date in case of reasons beyond the control of the officer like
natural calamity, civil commotion, etc.

Signature

Designation

318
 SECTION II

CONVERSION OF GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTIOFFICE INTO A
STATE AUTONOMOUS BODY OR PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKING.

The following terms and conditions will be applicable in the case of en masse
transfer of employees on conversion of a Government Department or a segment thereof or a
Government office into a State Public Sector Undertaking or an Autonomous Body :-

1. Pensionary Terms. -

(a) The permanent Government servants shall have an option to retain the
pensionary benefits available to them under the Government rules or be governed by the
rules of the Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous Body. This option shall also be
available to regularly appointed temporary employees after they have been confirmed in the
Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body.

(b) The Government servants who opt to be governed by the pensionary benefits
available under the Government, shall at the time of their retirement, be entitled to pension,
etc., in accordance with the Rajasthan Government rules in force at that time.

(c) The permanent Government servants with less than 10 year’s service and
temporary employees who opt for the rules of the Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous
Body shall be entitled to an amount equal to Provident Fund Contribution for the period of
their service under the Government upto the date of permanent absorption in the Public
Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body with simple interest at 6% per annum as opening
balance in their CPF account with the Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body.

(d) The permanent Government servants who have completed 10 year’s or more of
service and who opt for the retirement benefits of a Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous
Body will receive pro rata retirement benefits for the service rendered under the
Government. These will be regulated as follows: -

(i) Employees will have an option, either to draw pro rata pension monthly or to
draw a lump sum amount in lieu of 100% pro rata pension.

(ii) Where the employees opt in favour of monthly payment of pro rata pension,
the same shall be allowed to be drawn with effect from the date of permanent
absorption in a Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body. No part of pro
rata pension will be allowed to be commuted either at the time of permanent
absorption or any time thereafter.

(iii) In the case of employees who opt in favour of a lump sum amount in lieu of
100% pro rata pension, the lump sum value shall be worked out on the basis
of table prescribed under the R.C.S. (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996.

(iv) In the case of employees covered by clause (ii), the retirement gratuity and
for those covered by clause (iii) above, both retirement gratuity as well as
lump sum commuted value shall be paid on the expiry of a period of 7 year’s
from the date of permanent absorption. The amounts, however, can be paid
earlier in the event of death/retirement/resignation/discharge from service.

(v) The amounts of retirement gratuity and lump sum value in lieu of pension
mentioned in clause (iv) above shall remain with the Government, and earn
interest at the rate prescribed for General Provident Fund deposits from time
to time for the period they remain with the Government.

319
 2. Family Pension :-

(a) The family pension entitlements will be regulated as indicated below :-

(i) The employees who opt to continue to be governed by the Rajasthan
Government rules shall be governed by the Family Pension Scheme of the
Rajasthan Government; and

(ii) Those who opt to be governed by the rules of the Public Sector
Undertaking/Autonomous Body shall have an option to be governed either by
the Family Pension Scheme of the Rajasthan Government or by that of the
Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body, but NOT both. However, the
benefit of the Family Pension Scheme of the Rajasthan Government will be
available only to such of the employees who are permanent and have a
qualifying service of not less than ten years.

(b) The liability of the State Government in regard to cases covered by sub clause (ii)
of para 2(a) above will be frozen as on the date of permanent absorption of the individual
employees; that is to say, the amount of family pension payable will be calculated with
reference to the pay drawn and the rules in force on the date of permanent absorption.

(c) The employees covered by sub clause (i) of para 2(a) above and the eligible
employees covered by sub clause (ii) of para 2(a) above who opt for the Family Pension
Scheme of the Rajasthan Government will have to seek exemption from the operation of the
provisions of the Employees Family Pension Scheme Under Section 17 (1C) of the
Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, wherever necessary.
For this purpose, the concerned employee should submit a formal application for exemption
to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner through their employer, i.e., the concerned
Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body.

3: As soon as a Government Department, Office or segment of a Government
Department is converted into a Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body, the concerned
Government servants will be transferred to such new organisation on foreign service terms
in the initial period. The Government servants will be permanently absorbed in the Public
Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body with effect from a prospective date to be fixed by the
concerned Administrative Department and from that date they will cease to be Government
Department and from that date they will cease to be Government servants. Such of the
Government servants who are not willing to be absorbed will have an option to revert back
to Government service. In that event, if no suitable vacancies are available in the
Office/Department for such employees, their names will be transferred to authorities
empowered for absorption of surplus employees.

4. Formulation of service conditions by the new body.-

The Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body will formulate the terms and
conditions of service in the new body at the earliest possible date. The employees will
however have an option to retain Government pay scales till their promotion or retirement
(whichever is earlier) or to come over to the service conditions of Public Sector
Undertaking/Autonomous Body. However, until the exercise of this option, they will continue
to be governed by the pay scales, leave entitlement and terminal benefits under the
Government.

5. Effect of dismissal/removal from Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body
after absorption.-

Dismissal/removal from the service of a Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous
Body after absorption for any subsequent misconduct shall not amount to forfeiture of his
retirement benefits for the service rendered in the Rajasthan Government. Also in the event

320
 of dismissal/ removal of a transferred employee from the Public Sector Undertaking /
Autonomous body, the employee concerned will be allowed protection to the extent that the
Administrative Department will review such order before taking a final decision.

6. Adoption of Pension Scheme by Public Sector Undertaking/ Autonomous
Body.-

If, on conversion, an autonomous body/public sector undertaking adopts Pension
Scheme as applicable to Rajasthan Government servants, the service under Government
will qualify towards pension under the autonomous body, instead of the benefits mentioned
in para 1 above.

T. Procedure for discharging pensionary liability, etc.-

The discharge of pensionary liability of the Government to the newly established
organisation, transfer of Provident Fund balances and carry forward of leave in respect of
the service of the Government servants under the Government before their transfer to the
organisation shall be regulated as under :-

(i) The Government will discharge its pensionary liability by paying in lump sum
as a one time payment, the pro rata pension/service gratuity/terminal gratuity
and DCRG for the service upto the date of transfer of Government servants
from a Government department to the autonomous body/undertaking on its
conversion as such. Lump sum amount of pro rata pension will be determined
with reference to the commutation table, laid down in the R.C.S.
(Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996, as amended from time to time.

(ii) Carry-forward of leave will not be allowed in such cases. However, privilege
leave at the credit of Government servants at the time of transfer to an
autonomous body/public sector undertaking on the conversion of a Rajasthan
Government Department/Office as such may be allowed to be encashed
subject to a maximum of 240 days. Half pay leave will stand forfeited.

(iii) The amount of subscription towards General Provident fund together with
interest thereon standing to the credit of the Government servant shall not be
paid to him but shall be transferred with the consent of that body, to his new
Provident Fund Account under that body.

In cases where the Corporate Bodies do not have any Provident Fund Scheme or
whose Provident fund Rules do not provide for the acceptance of balance from other
Provident Funds, the amount in question should be finally paid to the person concerned at
the time of his transfer to such a body. Once such a transfer of Provident Fund balance has
taken place, the concerned person will be subject to the Provident Fund Rules of the
organisation and not of the Provident fund Rules of the Government of Rajasthan.

10. Retention of lien:-
No lien of the Government servant concerned will be retained in his parent cadre. All
his connections with the Government will be severed on his release for appointment in the

Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body consequent on conversion of government
Department/Office, and he will not be allowed to revert to his parent cadre.

321
 SECTION Ill

TRANSFER OF STATE GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES TO
CENTRAL AUTONOMOUS BODIES/STATUTORY BODIES
AND VICE VERSA.

The Government of Rajasthan has entered into an agreement for reciprocal
arrangement with the Central Government for counting of service for the purpose of pension
of employees of the State Government seeking absorption in autonomous bodies/statutory
bodies under the Central Government and vice versa, vide Memorandum No.F.1(28)FD
(Gr.-2)/85 dated 23-9-1988 and No.F.1(28)FD(Gr-2)/85 dated 19th August,1989. The orders
are reproduced below :-

Subject: Counting of service for the purpose of pension of employees of the State
Government seeking absorption in autonomous bodies/ _ statutory
bodies under the Central Government and vice versa.

The undersigned is directed to say that orders for sharing, on reciprocal basis, the
proportionate pensionary liability in respect of employees who had rendered service under
Central Government/State Government prior to securing post under the State
Government/Central Government have been issued vide F.D.Memo No.F-7(43)FD/Rules/58
dated 8/12/1970 and F.7 (43)FD(A)/Rules/58 dated 25/1/1984.

Initially, the employees of the Central Autonomous Bodies/Statutory bodies were
generally not entitled to the pensionary benefits and they were mainly entitled to the
Contributory Provident Fund benefits. Over the years, a large number of Central
Autonomous bodies/Statutory bodies have adopted the same pensionary scheme for their
employees as is available to the Central Government/State Government servants. Certain
employees of the State Government have also joined the Central Autonomous
Bodies/Statutory Bodies. Similarly, certain employees of the Central Autonomous
Bodies/Statutory bodies might have joined the State Government. These employees had
represented to the Central Government that their service under the State
Government/Central Autonomous Body/Statutory body may be allowed to be counted
towards pension under Central Autonomous body/Statutory body/State Government where
they are presently working.

The Central Government considered the matter in consultation with the State
Government and conveyed its decision vide Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Department of Pension and Pensioner’s Welfare letter No.28(10)84-P&PW-Vol.II dated
7/2/1986 that these cases may be decided in accordance with the principles as laid down in
the Department of Personnel & Administrative Reforms O.M. No.28(10)/84-Pension Unit
dated 29/8/84. Similar order regarding counting of service of the State Government
employees in the event of their absorption in the Central Autonomous _ bodies/Statutory
bodies and vice-versa was to be issued by the State Government.

In pursuance of the order issued by the Central Government referred to above, the
matter has been considered and the Governor is pleased to decide that the cases of the
State Government employees going over to a Central Autonomous body/Statutory Body
where pension scheme is in operation or vice-versa may be regulated as per the following
provisions:-

322
 (i)

(iii)

(iv)

NOTE :-

Where a State Government employee borne on pensionable establishment is
allowed to be absorbed in a Central Autonomous body/Statutory body, the
service rendered by him under the State Government shall be allowed to be
counted towards pension under the Autonomous body/Statutory body. The
same procedure will apply in the case of employees of the Central
Autonomous body/Statutory body who are permanently absorbed under the
State Government.

The State Government/Central Autonomous Body/Statutory body will
discharge its pension liability by paying in lump sum as a one-time payment,
the pro rata pension/service gratuity/Death cum-retirement gratuity for the
service upto the date of absorption in the Autonomous body/Statutory
body/State Government, as the case may be. The lump sum amount of the
pro rata pension will be determined with reference to the commutation table
laid down in the Rajasthan Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules,
1996, as amended from time to time.

In case of the State Government servants absorbed in a Central Autonomous
body/Statutory body the authority in favour of the concerned Head of the
Department for payment of lump sum amount to the concerned body shall be
issued by the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.

The Service rendered by an employee in a Central Autonomous body.
Statutory body, where pension scheme is in operation, prior to joining the
State Government shall be counted towards pension on receipt of lump sum
amount as envisaged above.

“Central Autonomous body” means a body which is financed wholly or
substantially from cess or Central Government grants. “Substantially” means
that more than 50% of the expenditure of the Autonomous body is met
through cess or Central Government grants. Autonomous body includes a
Central Statutory body or a Central University but does not include a public
undertaking.

This order shall apply to the employees of the State Government moving to the
Central Autonomous body/Statutory bodies and vice versa who were in the service of the
State Government/Central Autonomous body/Statutory body on 7/2/1986. Irrespective of the
date of their absorption. This order shall also be applicable to the employees moving after

7/2/1986

(Order No.F.1 (28)FD(Gr-2)/85 dated 23-9-1988)

“The Governor has been pleased to order that below item (iv) of Finance Department
Order of even number dated 23/9/1988, the following new items (v) and (vi) shall be added
as follows, namely :-

(v)

The employees of a Central autonomous body/statutory body or State
Government, as the case may be, who have already been sanctioned or have
received pro rata retirement benefits or other terminal benefits for their past
service will have the option either :-

(a) to retain such benefits and in that event their past service will not

qualify for pension under the Central autonomous body/Statutory body
or the State Government, as the case may be; or

323
 (b) to have the past service counted as qualifying service for pension
under the new organisation in which case the pro rata retirement or
other terminal benefits, if already received by them, will have to be
deposited alongwith interest thereon from the date of receipt of these
benefits till the date of deposit with the Central autonomous
body/statutory body or the State Government , as the case may be.
the rate of interest in such cases would be simple interest of 6% per
annum. The right to count previous service as qualifying service shall
not revive until the whole amount has been refunded. In other cases,
where pro rata retirement benefits have already been sanctioned but
have not yet become payable the concerned authorities shall cancel
the sanction as soon as the individual concerned opts for counting of
his previous service for pension and inform the individual in writing
about accepting his option and cancellation of the sanction, the option
shall be exercised within a period of one year from the date of issue of
these orders. If no option is exercised by such employees within the
prescribed time limit, they will be deemed to have opted for retention
of the benefits already received by them. The option once exercised
shall be final.

(vi) Where no terminal benefits for the previous service have been received, the
previous service in such cases will be counted as qualifying service for
pension only if the previous employer accepts pension liability for the service
in accordance with the principles laid down in Finance Department
Memorandum of even number dated 23/9/1988. In no case pension
contribution/ liability shall be accepted from the employee concerned.

This order shall be effective, as mentioned in the last para of Finance Department
Memorandum of even number dated 23/9/1988".

(Order No.F1(28)FD (Gr-2)/85 dated 19/8/1989)

324
 SECTION IV
FORMAT |

Format to be used on absorption in a state Autonomous
Body/Public Sector Undertaking having

a pension scheme.

To
(State PSU/Autonomous Body)
Subject:- Permanent absorption of 91#1/57ए...............-.--------------०----
(Name and Designation) in .................---------------------०-०-०---०---
(Name of the Organisation).
Sir,
| am directed to refer to your letter NO. ...............................-.------------- dated............. on
the above mentioned subject and to convey the sanction of the Governor to the permanent
absorption in ........................-.---------- * of Shri/Smt./KUMAML .......................-----------०-----०---०---०--- **
a permanent Rajasthan Government employee and
Department of ...................- **** on the terms and conditions envisaged in Rules ..................-
810...................- and Appendix IX Section | as amended from time to time, with effect from

the date and on the terms and conditions as indicated hereafter.
2. Date of effect:-
The permanent absorption shall take effect from (date)................ forenoon/afternoon.
3. Pension/Gratuity:-

(1) Shnl/Smt/ Nua) sows ** will exercise option within
six months of the issue of this order —

(i) either to count the qualifying service rendered under the Rajasthan
Government for pension in.............-

(ii) or to receive pro rata retirement benefits for the qualifying service rendered
under the Rajasthan Government.

The option shall be exercised in writing. The option once exercised shall be final. In
case no option is exercised within the stipulated period, he/she will be deemed to have
opted in favour of sub clause (i) above.

(2) In case he/she opts in favour of sub clause (i) of clause (1) above he/she will be
eligible to draw pension in accordance with the rules of the ..................---- * for the combined
service under the Rajasthan Government and that under the ... * on her final
retirement from that body. If he/she resigns from service of the ......................-.---- * his/her
resignation will be treated as resignation from Rajasthan Government service entailing
forfeiture of past services including that under the Government and consequent loss of
pensionary benefits for the combined service.

325
 (3) (a) In case he/she opts in favour of sub clause (ii) of clause (1), he/she will have
further option which will also have to be exercised along with the option referred to in clause
(1) above :-

(i) either to receive pro rata monthly pension,
(ii) or to receive a lump sum amount in lieu of monthly pension.

In case no specific option is indicated by him/her in this behalf, he/she will be
deemed to have opted in favour of sub clause (i) of this clause

(b) In the event of his/her option in favour of sub clause (i) of clause (3) (a), he/she
will draw pro rata pension and retirement gratuity for the service rendered under the
Government. He/she will also be eligible to commute up to one-third of his/her pension.

(c) If he/she opts in favour of sub clause (ii) of clause 3 (a) he/she will receive lump
sum amount in lieu of pro rata pension and retirement gratuity. The lump sum amount will be
calculated by applying the commutation table under the R.C.S. (Commutation of pension)
Rules, 1996, applicable on the date of his/her cessation of service under the Government.
The commutation shall be subject to medical examination. The pension so commuted shall
not be restored at any stage.

(d) Calculation of pro rata retirement benefits:-

The retirement gratuity and pro rata pension will be calculated in accordance with the
Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.

Note:- The benefit of the scheme of voluntary retirement as embodied in Rules 50 to
52 of the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, is not admissible in this case.

(e) Date of payment of pro rata retirement benefits:-

The amount of retirement gratuity and lump sum amount in lieu of pension wherever
opted will be payable immediately after the date of his/her permanent absorption. The
amount of pro rata monthly pension wherever applicable will also be payable from the date
following the date of cessation of service under the Rajasthan Government.

(f) Limitation as to the total amount of gratuity:-

The total gratuity admissible in respect of the service rendered under the
Government of Rajasthan and that under the ..........................-- * shall not exceed the
amount that would have been admissible, had Shri/Smt. ..............----------------------०००------------- **
continued in Government service and retired on the same pay which he/she drew on

retirement from .............---------०-----
(g) Effect of liberalisation of Pension/Gratuity Rules after absorption :-

Any further liberalisation of pension/gratuity rules decided upon by Government of
Rajasthan in respect of its officers after the permanent absorption of Shri/Smt. ..............-------
in. will not be extended to him/her in case
SHriU/SMt. oo. eeeeeeeeececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeseeeeseeeeeseneeessneeeeneeeess has opted to receive a lump sum
amount in lieu of pension on absorption and the permanent absorption has taken place from
a date prior to the date from which rationalisation/liberalisation in pension rules has been
given effect to by the Rajasthan Government.

326
 4. Family pension admissible from one source only:-

(i) Family pension will be admissible only from one source, i.e. either from the
Rajasthan Government or from the ...................- (name of the organisation)
and NOT FROM BOTH.

(ii) The benefit of family pension scheme of Rajasthan Government will be
available only to such of the Government servants who are permanent and
have a qualifying service of not less than ten years ; and

(iii) The liability of Rajasthan Government in regard to the amount of family
pension will be frozen as on the date of permanent absorption in the
नरबकयवारप्रमनयपभदारपनकप्ानपान 945८ (name of the organisation) and will be calculated with
reference to the pay drawn and the rules in force on the date of permanent
absorption. The eligibility of family members to receive family pension will be
regulated in accordance with the Rajasthan Government Rules/Orders in
force at the relevant time.

Note:- The family will not be eligible for any benefit under the family pension scheme
of the Rajasthan Government if he/she is not permanent and also does not
have a qualifying service of not less than ten years, on the date of absorption.

(iv) If he/she opts for the Family Pension Scheme of the Rajasthan Government,
he/she will have to seek exemption from the operation of the provisions of the
Employees Family Pension Scheme, 1971, under Section 17(1c) of the
Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952,
wherever necessary. For this purpose, he/she should submit a formal
application for exemption to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner

through his/her employer, i.€. ....................----------- (name of the organisation)
5. Fixation of pay on absorption:-
SHSM 1. ooo cece eee e cere eeeeseeeseeeseeeseaeseaeseaeseaeseeeeneeeeeeee ** will be free to negotiate

his emoluments with autonomous body/public sector undertaking. On his/her absorption,
he/she will be at par with other employees of the autonomous body and will be governed by
the rules of the autonomous body in all respects.

6. Leave:-

SHrI/SMt. ose eee eee eseeseeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeseeeeeeeneenaes ** will be entitled to an encashment
of earned leave to his/her credit at the time of acceptance of his/her resignation from
Government service subject to a maximum of 240 days. Half-pay leave will stand forfeited.

7. Benefits after permanent absorption:-

For the period of service rendered by Shri/Smt. ....................------------------------ sees al
(1 न मम * from the date of permanent absorption he/she will be entitled
to all the benefits admissible to the corresponding employees of the said organisation and

continue to be governed by its rules in all respects.
8. Provident Fund:-

The amount of subscription together with interest thereon standing to the credit of
SHSM ... .<--न्‍वरवनयवक्कसम्सक्स avomerreniennemenrtewseesaieees ** in the General Provident Fund

327
 Account will be transferred to his/her new Provident Fund Account under the (organisation)
with its consent. In case the autonomous body does not have Provident Fund Scheme or
the Provident Fund Scheme of autonomous body/public sector undertaking does not provide
for acceptance of balance from other Provident Funds, the G.P.F. balance shall be paid to
FS 11/0 1) न नर नल नि मर न मम मा लत are ** in cash. Once such a transfer of
Provident Fund balance has taken place, 9॥1/95#7........................-----------------------०---०-०---०--०--- a
will be subject to the Provident Fund Rules of the (organisation) and not of the Provident
Fund rules of the Government of Rajasthan.

Yours faithfully,

Secretary to the Government

(Officer competent to issue
the sanction from the
Department.)

Copy forwarded for information and necessary action to:-

(1) Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur
(2) SHri/Smt.** ......................--------""">"_">________>_न्‍-+->>-«

Secretary to the Government

Name of the Organisation to which proceeding.
Name of the Official.

Designation at the time of permanent absorption.
Name of Department from which proceeding.

RK

328
 FORMAT II

Format to be used on absorption in a State Autonomous
Body/Public Sector Undertaking having no

pension scheme

To

(State PSU/Autonomous Body)

Subject :- Permanent absorption of Shri/Smt . ............-.-----------०---०--०------

(Name and Designation) in ...........------- "०-०" ल्‍-_०_">>-«-<-«-२०«२---०-०----
(Name of the Organisation)

Sir,

| am directed to refer to your letter No. ............ Date 2 अमन 01 116
above mentioned subject and to convey the sanction of the Government to the permanent
BBSONPUOR 1 ccc vonsweeremanenienvieenemsnenes * of Shri/Smt./Kumari ....
a permanent Rajasthan Government employee and ** in the
Department Of .. ..............-------०-०---०----०---०-०---०---- **™* on the terms and conditions envisaged in

Rules and Appendix IX (Section |) as amended from time to time, with effect from the date
and on the terms and conditions as indicated hereafter.

2. Date of effect:-

The permanent absorption shall take effect from (date) ..................----------०-------०------०-----
forenoon/afternoon.
3. Pension/Gratuity :-

(a) Shri/SMt/KUMALL . .............---------""""_">__न्‍___->_ ceeeeseeeseeeeseeseseaeseeeeneeeneeeneeneees il

will exercise option within six months of the issue of this order.
(i) either to receive pro rata monthly pension,

(ii) or to receive a lump sum amount in lieu of monthly pension.

In case no specific option is indicated by him/her in this behalf, he/she will be
deemed to have opted in favour of sub clause (i) of this clause.

(b) In the event of his/her option in favour of sub-clause (i) of clause (3) (a),
he/she will draw pro rata pension and retirement gratuity for the service
rendered under the Government. He/she will also be eligible to commute up
to one-third of his/her pension.

(c) If he/she opts in favour of sub clause (ii) of clause 3 (a), he/she will receive
lump sum amount in lieu of pro rata pension and retirement gratuity. The
lump sum amount will be calculated by applying the commutation table under
the R.C.S. (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1996, applicable on the date of
his/her cessation of service under the Government. The commutation shall be
subject to medical examination. The pension so commuted shall not be
restored at any stage.

329
 (d) Calculation of pro rata retirement benefits :-

The retirement gratuity and pro rata pension will be calculated in accordance with the
Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.

Note:- The benefit of the scheme of voluntary retirement as embodied in Rules 50 to 52 of
the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, is not admissible in this case.

(e) Date of payment of pro rata retirement benefits :-

The amount of retirement gratuity and lump sum amount in lieu of pension wherever
opted will be payable immediately after the date of his/her permanent absorption. The
amount of pro rata monthly pension where applicable will also be payable from the date
following the date of cessation of service under the Rajasthan Government.

(f) Limitation as to the total amount of gratuity :-

The total gratuity admissible in respect of the service rendered under the
Government of Rajasthan and that under the * shall not exceed the
amount that would have been admissible, had Shri/Smt. ..... ............------------------ ** continued
in Government service and retired on the same pay which he/she drew on retirement
THOM sc cnincsonccowmvarimeewecisaemeel a

(g) Effect of Liberalisation of Pension/Gratuity Rules after absorption:-

Any further liberalisation of pension/gratuity rules decided upon by Government of
Rajasthan in respect of its officers after the permanent absorption of Shri/Smt.................5- al
IN ............------ will not be extended to him/her in case Shri/Smt.... ...........----------०--०---०--- * has
opted to receive a lump sum amount in lieu of pension on absorption and the permanent
absorption has taken place from a date prior to the date from which rationalisation/
liberalisation in pension rules has been given effect to by the Rajasthan Government.

4. Family pension admissible from one source only:-

(i) Family pension will be admissible only from one source, i.e. either from the
Rajasthan Government or from the ........................-------------------- (name of the organisation)
and NOT FROM BOTH.

(ii) the benefit of family pension scheme of Rajasthan Government will be available
only to such of the Government servants who are permanent and have a qualifying service
of not less than ten years; and

(iii) The liability of the Rajasthan Government in regard to the amount of family
pension will be frozen as on the date of permanent absorption (in the name of the
organisation) and will be calculated with reference to the pay drawn and the rules in force on
the date of permanent absorption. The eligibility of family members to receive family pension
will be regulated in accordance with the Rajasthan Government Rules/Orders in force at the
relevant time.

Note:- The Family will not be eligible for any benefit under the family pension scheme of the
Rajasthan Government if he/she is not permanent and also does not have a
qualifying service of not less than ten years, on the date of absorption.

(iv) If he/she opts for the Family pension Scheme of the Rajasthan Government,
he/she will have to seek exemption from the operation of the provisions of the Employees
Family pension scheme, 1971, under section 17 (1-c) of the Employees Provident Funds
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, wherever necessary. For this purpose, he/she
should submit a formal application for exemption to the Central Provident Fund
Commissioner through his/her employer, i.€. ......................------ (name of the organisation).

330
 5. Fixation of pay on absorption:-

SAAS occccssennanrcrererimorancarercnvcwon ** will be free to negotiate his emoluments with
autonomous body/public sector undertaking. On his/her absorption, he/she will be at par
with other employees of the autonomous body and will be governed by the rules of the
autonomous body in all respects.

6. Leave :-

>1॥/01॥1 छा ** will be entitled to an encashment of earned
leave to his/her credit at the time of acceptance of his/her resignation from Government
service subject to a maximum of 240 days. Half-pay leave will stand forfeited.

7. Benefits after permanent absorption :-

For the period of service rendered by Shri/Smt. .................-.-.--------------------------- ™ in
SSG कक ASSERTS * from the date of permanent absorption he/she will be entitled to
all the benefits admissible to the corresponding employees of the said organisation and
continue to be governed by its rules in all respects.

8. Provident Fund :-

The amount of subscription together with interest thereon standing to the credit of
ज॥11/5ाएए...............-.----------- ०-५" ">>" ५ ** in the General Provident Fund account will be
transferred to his/her new Provident Fund Account under the (organisation) with its consent.
In case the autonomous body does not have Provident Fund Scheme or the Provident Fund
Scheme of autonomous body/public sector undertaking does not provide for acceptance of
balance from other Provident Funds, the G.P.F. balance shall be paid to Shri/Smt. ............. se
in cash. Once such a transfer of Provident Fund balance has taken place, Shri/Smt.
bee ceeeeeteteeeenees ** will be subject to the Provident Fund Rules of the (organisation) and not of
the Provident Fund Rules of the Government of Rajasthan.

Yours faithfully,

Secretary to the Government
(Officer competent to issue
the sanction from the
department.)
Copy forwarded for information and necessary action to: -
(1) Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur

(2) S0/SMt” veces

Secretary to the Government

Name of the Organisation to which proceeding.
Name of the Official.
Designation at the time of permanent absorption.

अर

Name of Department from which proceeding.

331
 SECTION V

TRANSFER OF STATE GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES
TO PUBLIC ENTERPRISES UNDER THE CONTROL
OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

The question of granting terminal benefits to the Rajasthan Government servants
transferred to public enterprises under the control of the Government of India has been
under consideration of the Government and it has been decided that in the case of
permanent or temporary Government servant whose appointment under Government was
made in accordance with provisions of relevant service rules regarding recruitment,
promotion etc. promulgated under proviso to article 309 of the constitution of India, or on the
recommendation of the Rajasthan Public Service Commission or Departmental Selection
Committee and who have completed not less than 5 years continuous service under
Government at the time of transfer of his service to Public Enterprises under the control of
the Government of India, the transfer of his service may be treated in public interest and he
shall, on his permanent absorption, be entitled to:-

A. Pension :-

(a) Pension and/ or gratuity as admissible under the Rajasthan Civil Services
(Pension) Rules, 1996 for service rendered by him under the Government at the end of
period of two years of his absorption provided that if the Government servant concerned
attains the age of superannuation, within these two years, he shall be entitled to receive the
benefits from the date of superannuation. He shall not be entitled to family pension under
chapter V and VIII of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996.

(b) In lieu of monthly pension admissible under (a) above the Government servant
concerned may opt to receive a lump sum amount worked out with reference to
commutation table obtaining on the date from which pension will be admissible and payable.
The option will be exercised within six months from the date of permanent absorption or
date of order of permanent absorption, whichever is later.

(c) Any further liberalisation of Pension rules decided upon by the Government after
the permanent absorption of the Government servant in the Public Enterprises would not be
extended to him.

(d) In case where a Government servant at the time of absorption has less than 10
years qualifying service he will only be eligible to proportionable service gratuity in lieu of
pension and to Death-Cum-Retirement Gratuity based on length of service.

B. Provident Fund :-

(1) The amount of Government contribution and/or subscription together with interest
thereon, standing in the Provident Fund Account of a Government Officer, be transferred to
his, new Provident Fund Account under the enterprise, if he so desires, provided the
concerned enterprise also agrees to such a transfer. If, however, the concerned enterprise
does not operate a Provident Fund, the amount, in question shall be refunded to the
subscriber. Once such a transfer of Provident Fund balance as taken place, the officer will
be governed by the Provident Fund Rules of the concerned enterprise and not by the
Provident Fund Rules of the Government.

332
 (2) These concessions may not be claimed as a matter of right, but may be
sanctioned by the Government in individual cases where the same are merited. Individual
cases will be dealt with by the Administrative Department concerned, in consultation with the
Finance Department.

(3) The decision contained in preceding paragraphs will apply only where the service

of a Government servant is transferred permanently to Public Enterprises and it will not
apply to case of transfer to a Private Institution or Private Sector Corporation.

333
 APPENDIX X
PAYMENT OF ARREARS OF PENSION
AND COMMUTATION (NOMINATION) RULES 1996
GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN
FINANCE (R&Al) DEPARTMENT

NOTIFICATION

No.F.7(11)FD/R&AI/96 Jaipur dated the 18th Sept., 1996.

In exercise of the powers conferred by section 11 of the Pension Act, 1958
(Rajasthan Act No.27 of 1958), the State Government hereby makes the following rules,
namely:-

1. Short title and commencement :-

(1) These rules may be called the Payment of Arrears of Pension and
Commutation (Nomination ) Rules, 1996.

(2) They shall come into force with effect from 1st Oct., 1996.
2. Application :-

These rules shall apply to the State Government pensioners who are in receipt of
any Pension under the rules which govern such pensioners and which is payable by the
Government out of the consolidated Fund of the State.

3. Definitions :-

In these Rules, unless the subject or context otherwise requires :
(a) “Act” means the Rajasthan Pensions Act, 1958 (Rajasthan Act No.27 of

1958);
(b) “Form” means a form appended to these rules;
(c) “Nomination” means nomination made under these rules;
(d) “Nominee” means a person nominated by an employee/Pensioner under

these rules; and

(e) *Pension Disbursing Authority” means the authority through whom pension is
drawn and includes -

(i) Branch of nominated public sector bank, or

(ii) Treasury including sub-treasury.

4. Nomination :-

(1) Every pensioner who has retired on or before the date of commencement of
these rules shall within six months nominate any person for the purpose of rule 5 in Form A
and submit it in triplicate by personal service after taking receipt or by sending it through
registered post acknowledgement due to the respective Pension Disbursing Authority
through whom pension is drawn.

334
 (2) Every employee who is due to retire after the date of commencement of these
rules shall submit the nomination in triplicate in Form A to the head of office/Department
from where he is retiring within three months before or after the date of retirement.

(3) Within 30 days of the receipt of the nomination, the pension Disbursing Authority
or the Head of Office/Department, as the case may be, shall get the particulars of the
pensioner verified with reference to relevant records and return to the pensioner the
duplicate copy of the nomination duly attested by him or by an officer authorised by him in
this behalf after obtaining the receipt thereof. The triplicate copy of the nomination shall be
sent to the Director, Pension for taking further action, if any, and the original copy of the
nomination shall be kept with the pension file.

(4) A Notice of modification of nomination including a case where a nominee pre-
deceases the pensioner shall be submitted in triplicate in Form B to the Pension Disbursing
Authority or the Head of Office/Department as the case may be, in the manner specified in
sub-rules (1) to (3) and thereafter the provisions shall apply mutatis mutandis with
modifications as if it was made under sub-rule (1) or (2).

(5) A nomination or a fresh nomination or a notice of modification of nomination shall
be signed by the employee/pensioner or if he is illiterate shall bear his thumb-impression
given in the presence of two witnesses who shall also sign a declaration to that effect in the
nomination, fresh nomination or notice of modification of nomination as the case may be.

(6) Nomination, fresh nomination or notice of modification of nomination shall take
effect from the date of receipt thereof by Pension Disbursing Authority or the Head of
Office/Department as the case may be.

5. Nominee to receive arrears of pension or commutation of pension:-

The nominee shall receive, after the death of the pensioner all money payable to the
pensioner, on account of such pension and/or commuted amount of the pension if it has
become absolute as per rule 6 of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Commutation of Pension)
Rules, 1996 on, before or after the date of such nomination and which remains unpaid
immediately before the death of the pensioner.

6. Accepted nomination to be conclusive proof:-

A nomination made under rule 4 and accepted by the Pension Disbursing Authority
or the Head of Office/Department, as the case may be, shall be conclusive proof with regard
to the person nominated to receive arrears of pension/commutation of the pension under
these rules.

7. Mode of payment of arrears :-

The arrears of pension, amount of commuted pension payable under these rules
shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of the R.C.S. (Pension ) Rules, 1996
governing the mode of payment of pension.

8. Interpretation :-

Where any doubt arises as to the interpretation of these rules the matter shall be
referred to the Government in the Finance (R.& 8.1.) Department for final decision.

9. Repeal and Savings :-

(1) On the commencement of these rules, every rule, regulation contained in
Payment of Arrears of Pension and Commutation (Nomination) rules, 1985, as amended
from time to time or order including Office Memoranda (hereinafter referred to in this rule as

335
 the old rule) in force immediately before such commencement shall, in so far as it provides
for any of the matters contained in these rules, cease to operate.

(2) Notwithstanding such ceaser of operation any thing done or any action taken
under the old rules shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provision of these rules.

By Order of the Governor,

Dr. ADARSH KISHORE
Secretary to the Government.

336
 Pension Disbursing Authority/Head of Office

Name of Bank/Treasury

FORMA

(See Rule 4)

|,...................-.----------००-००००- -००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००००-०-------०००००-०---०----------०--०---०------०-०-०--- hereby
(Name of the pensioner in capital letters)

nominate the person named below, under Rule 4 of the Payment of Arrears of Pension
(Nomination) Rules, 1996.

Name and
address of the
nominee

Relationship
with the
pensioner

If nominee is minor

Date of birth

Name and address of
person who may receive
the said pension during the
nominee’s minority

4

Name and
address of other
nominee in case
the nominee
under column
(1) predeceases
the pensioner

Relationship
with the
pensioner

Date of birth if | Name and address of

the other

person who may receive

nominee is the pension during the

minor

other nominee’s minority

Contingency
on happening
of which
nomination
shall become
invalid

Name & Address

Signature ( or thumb-impression if
illiterate) and name of Pensioner.

Address:

Signature of Pension
Authority/Head of Office.

Disbursing

Acknowledgement to be sent by the Pension Disbursing Authority/Head of Office.

337

 Certified that application/nomination has been received from....
जज तन न 5०55० (Name of Pensioner) whose address is

Place : Signature of Pension Disbursing Authority
Date : Bank/Treasury

Head of Office.

Full Address:

338

 Pension Disbursing Authority

Name of Bank/Treasury

FORMB

(See Rule 4)

hereby

(Name of the pensioner in capital letters)

make the following alternative nomination in cancellation of the previous nomination made
०1 मा under Rule 4 of the Payment of
Arrears of Pension (Nomination) Rules, 1996.

Name and Relationship If nominee is minor

address of the with the

nominee pensioner

Date of birth Name and address of
person who may receive
the said pension during the
nominee’s minority
1 2 3 4

Name and Relationship Date of birth if Name and address of Contingency

address of other with the the other person who may receive — on happening

nominee in case pensioner nominee is the pension during the of which

the nominee minor other nominee’s minority nomination

under column
(1) predeceases
the pensioner

shall become
invalid

Witness: Signature:
Name & Address

Signature ( or thumb-impression if
illiterate) and name of Pensioner.

Address:

Signature of Pension Disbursing Authority.
Date Stamp.

339
 Certified that application/nomination (Form B) has been received from
जज तन न 5०55० (Name of Pensioner) whose address is

Form A has been cancelled and returned to him.

Place : Signature of Pension Disbursing Authority
Date : Bank/Treasury
With Full Address:

340
 APPENDIX XI

ACTION TO BE TAKEN BY RETIRING
GOVERNMENT SERVANTS FOR TIMELY
AUTHORISATION OF THEIR PENSIONS.

1. WHILE IN SERVICE :-

Please examine the Service Book and Leave Account periodically and ensure the

following:-

(a)

(d)

(9)

(h)

Date of birth is correctly recorded and attested on first page.

Date of entry to Government service, confirmation, promotion, reversion etc.
are correctly recorded under proper attestation.

Certificates of verification of service are invariably recorded by the Head of
Office every year as required under General Financial and Accounts, Rules.
Where service verification is wanting, submit written statement in Form 9 on
plain paper, verifying the truth of the statement, and produce all documentary
evidence and information available, as required under rule 81(1)(a) (vi) of
R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, to enable the Head of Office to verify the
service and record it in the service book.

In case you were work charged employee and absorbed/appointed to regular
post under Government, option for pension in lieu of C.P.F. benefits is pasted
in the Service Book. (Option Form 4 A).

Entry to the effect of deposit of Employer’s share of C.P.F. balance into
Government account and T.E. passed by the State Insurance/GPF
Department has been recorded in the Service Book.

In the case of suspension, the certificate whether or not the period of
suspension counts for pension is recorded.

If extra-ordinary leave is taken on medical certificate or for higher studies or
for due to civil commotion, natural calamity, the orders of the competent
authority counting the leave period for pension is recorded in the service book
giving reference of Government Order Number and date.

(i) if you proceed on foreign service, ensure that pension contributions
are paid by the foreign employer and the Service Book is sent to the
Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur, for recording the
requisite certificate of deposit.

(ii) If for the period of foreign service, the pension contribution is to be
paid by you, please ensure deposit of the amount and its entry in the
Service Book from the Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan,
Jaipur.

In case your entry to the Service of the Government was at an advanced age,
ensure to get it regularised by obtaining relaxation of age limit under Rule 9 of
the Rajasthan Service Rules.

That you have filled in Nomination for Retirement/Death Gratuity in Form 1 or
2, as the case may be, correctly, and the same is duly accepted by the Head
of Office and suitable entry of its receipt has been made in the Service Book
and further that a clear note has been made in the Service Book as to the
receipt of nomination and for lodging of the same in safe custody.

341
 (0)

That the details of the members of the family in Form 3 under rule 74 of
R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996, duly countersigned by the Head of Office are
pasted in the Service Book.

You may obtain a duplicate copy of the Service Book as provided in
Government of Rajasthan’s Decision Nos. 2 & 3 under rule 160 of Rajasthan
Service Rules and arrange to keep it up-to-date. The certificate of verification
of services should also be got recorded in the duplicate Service Book and got
attested by the competent authority.

That privilege leave has been credited to your account on first of January
and July every year.

That entry in the Service Book in regard to fixation of pay done under various
pay fixation rules from time to time has been recorded in the Service Book
under proper attestation.

In case you are a gazetted officer, original copy of History of Service upto
31.12.1974, issued by the Accountant General, Rajasthan, is either attached
with the Service Book or pasted therein.

Any _ kind of deficiency, omission, imperfection noticed by you is brought to
the notice of the Head of Office.

Il. ACTION TO BE INITIATED WITHIN TWO YEARS PRIOR TO THE DATE OF
RETIREMENT.

The Government servant who is due to retire within next two years should initiate the
following actions :-

(a)

(b)

(e)

Two years before the date of retirement, he should submit applications:-

(i) in Form 27 to Director of Estates/P.W.D. for issue of No Demand
Certificate in respect of Government accommodation; or

(ii) in Form 27A certifying that no Government accommodation has been
occupied by him.

(iii) in Form 28 to the Treasury Officer concerned for issue of No Dues
Certificate in respect of Long Term Advances taken by him during his
service career; or

(iv) in Form 28A certifying that he has not taken any long term advance in
his service career.

Eight months prior to the date of retirement, submit Form 5 and Form 5 A (in
triplicate) which contains descriptive roll, namely, particulars, signatures,
identification mark, address and joint photograph etc. See that the
instructions contained in the form and its requirements are complied with
correctly.

One year before retirement, see that the appointing authority issues the
retirement order and that it contains certificate of No D.E. pending under rule
16 of CCA Rules’ or otherwise.

Comply with any instructions/information/data required by the Treasury
Officer or Directorate of Estates/PWD for issue of No Demand certificate, and
pursue the same if the information has been desired from the Head of Office.

If you are officiating Government servant at the time of retirement, ensure
that the requisite certificate for counting officiating pay for pension as per
Rule 45 (note 3) is recorded by the Head of Office in the Service Book.

342
 (9)

See that the Head of Office sends intimation of Government dues/No dues
outstanding against you to the Director Pension Department two months
before the date of retirement as required under Rule 85 of R.C.S. (Pension)
Rules, 1996.

Comply with the directions/instructions or submit any data required by the
Head of Office for rectification of any omission, deficiency or imperfection in
the Service Book.

ACTION TO BE TAKEN AT THE TIME OF RETIRING FROM GOVERNMENT
SERVICE i.e. BEFORE OR AT THE TIME OF DEMITTING OFFICE.

Following action may be taken so that pension case is not delayed:

(a)

(b)

Please clear all Government dues, if any, to enable the Head of Office to
communicate no dues to the Director, Pension Department, so that the case
is neither delayed nor any recovery is ordered to be made from Retirement
Gratuity.

If in occupation of Government residence, pay off rent etc. preferably in
cash, upto the last day of occupation and ensure immediate issue of No
Demand Certificate.

Please obtain a copy of Final Last Pay Certificate for your record, issued by
the Head of Office.

Please apply for encashment of privilege leave due, if desired, to the Head
of Office, at least one month in advance of the date of retirement.

In case any delay is anticipated in authorising of pension or preparation of
papers, request the Head of Office to grant provisional pension and gratuity.

Please communicate to the Director, Pension Department as also to the
Head of Office who processed the pension case, any event/occurrence after
the pension case has been sent to the Director, Pension which has a bearing
on the amount of pension admissible to the Government servant (Rule 84).

Furnish a declaration to the Head of Office giving consent for recovery of
dues, if any, from pension or retirement gratuity.

343
 APPENDIX Xil
Grant of Interim Relief to the State Government Pensioners/Family Pensioners.

"The Governor has been pleased to order that the State Government
Pensioners/Family Pensioners may be allowed Interim Relief @ Rs. 50/- per month and, in
addition, 10% of the basic Pension/Family pension subject to a minimum of Rs. 50/- per
month w.e.f. 1-4-1995.

If a pensioner/family pensioner is re-employed/employed under the State
Government/ Central Government or a Corporation/Company/Body/Bank under them in
India or abroad including permanent absorption in such Corporation/Company /Body/Bank,
he/she shall not be eligible to draw Interim Relief on pension/family pension during the
period of such re-employment/employment.

Interim relief may be shown as a separate element. No Dearness Relief on this
element will be admissible. Interim Relief involving a fraction of a rupee may be rounded off
to the next higher rupee.

In case of persons in receipt of more than one pension, the Interim Relief will be
calculated on the total of all pensions taken together.

Accountant General and authorised Public Sector Banks making payment of Pension
on behalf of the State Government are requested to arrange payment of Interim Relief to the
Pensioners on the basis of above instructions without waiting for any further communication
from this Department.”

211 continuation of Finance Department Order of even number dated 17-8-1995 it is
clarified that the term basic pension/family pension used in the aforesaid order shall mean :-

(a) in respect of employees retired/retiring on or after 1/9/1986, the original pension
(inclusive of commuted portion of pension);

(b) in respect of employees who retired on or after 31/3/1986 but prior to 1/9/1986,
original pension/revised pension (inclusive of commuted portion of pension) plus increase in
pension admissible thereon in terms of Finance Department Order No.F.1(44)FD(Gr.2)/82,
dated 1/4/1986;

(c) in respect of employees who retired prior to 31/3/1986, ‘consolidated pension’ as
defined in paragraph 7 of Finance Department Order No.F.1(47)FD(Gr.2)/88, dated
2/12/1989;

(d) in respect of pensioners getting minimum pension/family pension, the minimum
pension/family pension i.e. Rs. 300/- per month.

It is also clarified that the aforesaid order shall be applicable to the widows getting
ex-gratia payment in accordance with the provisions contained in Finance Department Order
No.F.1(35)FD(Gr.2)/87 dated 2/7/1991 and 2/7/1992.”

“The Governor has been pleased to order that the State Government Pensioners/
Family Pensioners may be allowed one more instalment of Interim Relief @ 10% of the
Basic Pension/ Family Pension subject to a minimum of Rs.100/- per month w.e.f. 1.4.1996.

2. The term basic pension / family pension for the aforesaid purpose shall mean: -

(a) in respect of employees retired/ retiring on or after 1.9.1986, the original
pension (inclusive of commuted portion of pension);

Inserted vide FD order No.F.1(14)FD(Rules)/95 dated 17/8/1995.
Inserted vide FD clarification No.F.1(14)FD(Rules)/95 dated 19/2/1996.
Inserted vide FD Order No.F.1(14)FD(Rules)/95 dated 22/10/1996.

ona

344
 (b) in respect of employees who retired on or after 31.3.1986 but prior to
1.9.1986, original pension/ revised pension (inclusive of commuted portion of
pension) plus increase in pension admissible thereon in terms of Finance
Department Order No.F.1(44)FD(Gr.2)/82, dated 1.4.1986;

(c) in respect of employees who retired prior to 31.3.1986 ‘Consolidated Pension’
as defined in paragraph 7 of Finance Department Order
No.F.1(47)FD(Gr.2)/88, dated 2.12.1989;

(d) in respect of pensioners getting minimum pension / family pension, the
minimum pension/family pension i.e. Rs.300/- per month.

3. If a pensioner/family pensioner is re-employed/employed under the State
Government/ Central Government or a Corporation/Company/Body/Bank under them in
India or abroad including permanent absorption in such Corporation/Company /Body/Bank,
he/she shall not be eligible to draw Interim Relief on pension/family pension during the
period of such re-employment/employment.

4. Interim relief may be shown as a separate element as usual. No Dearness Relief on
this element will be admissible. Interim Relief involving a fraction of a rupee may be rounded
off to the next higher rupee.

5. In case of persons in receipt of more than one pensions, the Interim Relief will be
calculated on the total of all pensions taken together.

6. This order shall also applicable to the pensioners/family pensioners who are in
receipt of provisional pension.

?. This order shall also be applicable to the widows who are in receipt of exgratia
payment in accordance with the provisions contained in Finance Department Order
No.F.1(35)FD(Gr.2)/87 dated 2/7/1991 and 2/7/1992.

8. Accountant General and authorised Public Sector Banks making payment of Pension
on behalf of the State Government are requested to arrange payment of Interim Relief to the
Pensioners on the basis of above instructions without waiting for any further communication
from this Department.”

345
 FORMS

FORM 1

[See Rule 59 (1)]

Nomination for Retirement Gratuity/Death Gratuity

When the Government servant has a family and wishes to nominate one member, or
more than one member,thereof.

|| ..२--नकन्‍लसभन्ततसस9न्‍नकननतप सन द कर दस पवन _नत 9 तन न न तनक न वन सननत पका धन कान न कननन5 hereby nominate the person/persons
mentioned below who is/are member (s) of my family, and confer on him/them the right to
receive, to the extent specified below, any gratuity the payment of which may be authorised
by the Government in the event of my death while in service and the right to receive on my
death, to the extent specified below, any gratuity which having become admissible to me
on retirement may remain unpaid at my death :-

Original nominee (s)

Names and Relationship with the Age Amount of share of
addresses of Government servant gratutiy payable to
nominee/nominees each*

(1) (2) (3) (4)

Alternate nominee (s)

Name, address, relationship and age of Amount or share of
the person or persons, if any, to whom the gratuity payable
right conferred on the nominee shall pass in the to each**

event of the nominee pre-deceasing the Government
servant or the nominee dying after the death of the
Government servant but before receiving payment of
gratuity

(5) (6)

This nomination supersedes the nomination made by me earlier ON ......................-.---
which stands cancelled.

NOTE- (i) The Government servant shall draw lines across the blank space below the
last entry to prevent the insertion of any name after he has signed.

(ii) Strike out which is not applicable.

346
 Dat6d TRIS ccsrccccrneresctemesnarmmveversmncanerel DAY, Of मम न न मल मम मम मल मी, 19

Gl है Witnesses to signature:

2. .......... answsanmennnenmmanssensmasemenmenassenaetis Signature of Government
servant

(To be filled by the Head of Office)

Nomination by .

Designation . 5

OFFICE. eee ee cece >> जज ० ०55० 55 59५5
Signature of Head of Office
जिला... ncouseemorensscemewernvrearcticmee
0069व61910ा......................-.-.----

Form for acknowledging the receipt of the
nomination form by the Head of Office

To

Sir,

In acknowledging the receipt of your nomination, dated the /cancellation,
dated the ................- of the nomination made earlier in respect of gratuity in Form ........ |
am to state that it has been duly placed on record.

PHAGE मनन मम Signature of Head of Office
Dated the .......... Designation..............
NOTE - The Government servant is advised that it would be in the interest of his

nominees if copies of the nominations and the related notices and
acknowledgments are kept in safe custody so that they may come into the
possession of the beneficiaries in the event of his death.

*

This column should be filled in so as to cover the whole amount of the gratuity.
The amount/share of the gratuity shown in this column should cover the whole
amount/share payable to the original nominee(s).

**

347
 FORM 2
Nomination for Retirement Gratuity/Death Gratuity

When the Government servant has no family and wishes to nominate one person or
more than one person.

| .रनकनकनकननत9कतकन99कन न नत__पधनक तन व बन त नस मन! having no family, hereby nominate the person/persons
mentioned below and confer on him/them the right to receive, to the extent specified below,
any gratuity the payment of which may be authorised by the Government in the event of my
death while in service and the right to receive on my death, to the extent specified below,
any gratuity, which having become admissible to me on retirement may remain unpaid at my
death:-

Original nominee (s)

Names and Relationship with the Age Amount of share of
addresses of Government servant gratuity payable to
nominee/nominees each*

(1) (2) (3) (4)

Alternate nominee (s)

Name, address, relationship and age of Amount or share of
the person or persons, if any, to whom the gratuity payable
right conferred on the nominee shall pass in the to each**

event of the nominee pre-deceasing the Government
servant or the nominee dying after the death of the
Government servant but before receiving payment of
gratuity

(5) (6)

This nomination supersedes the nomination made by me earlier ON ......................-.---
which stands cancelled.

NOTE- (i) The Government servant shall draw lines across the blank space below the
last entry to prevent the insertion of any name after he has signed.

(ii) Strike out which is not applicable.

Dated (HIS scence Gay 0f है न मम मम मम 19 @ comers

Witnesses to signature:

Signature of Government servant

348
 (To be filled by the Head of Office)

Nomination DY vc मम मम

Designation ................-.---------०-०----०---०--०-०-------

OMICS — आय
Signature of Head of Office
Date... ...........--------०-------०---०-----
069ं6ा9ा0ा.....................-.------

Form for acknowledging the receipt of the
nomination form by the Head of Office
To
Sir,
In acknowledging the receipt of your nomination, dated ॥116..................... /cancellation,
dated the ................. of the nomination made earlier in respect of gratuity in Form ..............

| am to state that it has been duly placed on record.

7?॥80०6............... Signature of Head of Office
Dated the .......... Designation..............
NOTE - The Government servant is advised that it would be in the interest of his

nominees if copies of the nominations and the related notices and
acknowledgments are kept in safe custody so that they may come into the
possession of the beneficiaries in the event of his death.

*

This column should be filled in so as to cover the whole amount of the gratuity.
The amount/share of the gratuity shown in this column should cover the whole amount/
share payable to the original nominee(s).

कर

349
 FORM 3
[See Rule 74]
Details of family

Name of the Government servant :
Designation

Date of birth

Date of appointment

Details of members of my family

FAS ON ................ ceeeeeeeeeeeeeteesteeeaees
Serial Name of the Date of Relationship Initials of Remarks
No. members of Birth with the the Head
family * officer of Office
i) C2) (©) ) (39५  (°)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

| hereby undertake to keep the above particulars up-to-date by notifying to the Head
of office any addition or alteration.

7180०6...................... - Signature of Government servant
Dated ॥16................-

Family for this purpose means family as defined in Clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule
66 of the R.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1996.
Countersigned

Head Of Office
(Seal)

Date:

350
 FORM 4

FORM OF OPTION TO WORK CHARGED
EMPLOYEES GOVERNED BY C.P.F. RULES

(See rule 14, G.R.D. 1)

In pursuance of Government of Rajasthan’s Decision below rule 14 of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, |, .. son of Shri ....
designation ..and who is a subscriber to the Contributory Provident
Fund Account No ...under work Charged Employees contributory Provident
Fund Scheme hereby, opt for the pension rules contained in the Rajasthan Civil Service
(Pension) Rules, 1996, including the Family Pension Rules, as amended from time to time in
lieu of the work charged employees Contributory Provident Fund benefits as now
admissible:

Signature of
Government Servant.

Witness: Date :
Signature: Name in Full
Date : (in block letters)
Name in full Designation

(in block letters) Office
Designation

Office.

Countersigned
Signature with date
(Head of office)

Received the above declaration.

Signature
Head of Office.
Station

Date

351
 FORM 5
[See Rules 81 (1)(c) and 83(1)]

Particulars to be obtained by the Head of Office from the retiring Government servant

eight months before the date of his retirement

1. Name:

2. (a) Date of birth :

(b) Date of retirement :

3. ‘Three specimen signatures (to be furnished in a separate sheet) duly attested by a
Gazetted Government servant.

4. ?Three copies of passport size joint photograph with wife or husband (to be attested
by the Head of Office)

(4 copies to be submitted if payment is required outside Rajasthan).

5. ‘Three slips showing the particulars of height and personal identification marks duly

attested by a Gazetted Government servant.

Present address.

5Address after retirement.

Name of the Treasury or the Branch of Public Sector Bank through which the
pension is to be drawn.

9. Details of the family in Form 3.

10. Indicate whether, family pension is admissible from any other source — Military or
Central or any other State Government and/or a public sector undertaking/
autonomous body/Local Fund under the Central or a State Government.

जा 210 Signature

Dated the............... Designation

Deptt./Office

dy Two slips each bearing the left hand thumb and finger impressions duly attested may
be furnished by a person who is not literate to sign his name. If such a Government
servant on account of physical disability is unable to give left hand thumb and finger
impressions he may give thumb and finger impressions of the right hand. Where a
Government servant has lost both the hands, he may give his toe impressions.
Impressions should be duly attested by a Gazetted Government servant.

2. Two copies of the passport size photograph of self only need be furnished if the
Government servant is governed by chapter (V) C of the Rajasthan Civil Services
(pension) Rules, 1996 and is unmarried or a widower or widow.

3. Where it is not possible for a Government servant to submit a photograph with his

wife or her husband, he or she may submit separate photographs. The photographs
shall be attested by the Head of Office.

Specify a few conspicuous marks, not less than two, if possible.

Any subsequent change of address should be notified to the Head of Office.

352
 FORM 5A
(See Rules 81 (1) (d) and 83 (1) and note in Form 5)
(in triplicate)

DETAILS OF PARTICULARS OF GOVERNMENT SERVANT

Name:
2. (a) Date of birth :
(b) Date of retirement :
3. Three specimen signatures: : र८नवराबशनमः>लस>+अन्त
2 ersesreneeeecs
3...............-.-----

3. (i) Three specimen signatures (to be furnished in a separate sheet) duly attested
by a Gazetted Government servant.

3: (ii) Three copies of passport size joint photograph with wife or husband (to be
attested by the Head of Office ) (4 copies to be submitted if payment is required
outside Rajasthan)

3: (iii) Three slips showing the particulars of height and personal identification
marks duly attested by a Gazetted Government servant.

4. Height :

5. Personal identification mark:

6. Left/Right hand thumb and Thumb Index Middle Ring Lit finger impressions (in case
not literate to sign).

7. Present Address:

8. Address after retirement :

9. Father’s/Husband’s Name :

10. Name of Treasury/Branch of Public Sector
Bank through which the pension is to
be drawn :

11. Joint photograph of Shri/Smt
with wife/nusband Smt/Shri
(See Notes 2 and 3 in Form 5)

Attested Joint Signature of the applicant.

Photograph

Attested :
Signature :
Name and designation(With Seal)

Dated :............... of Attesting Officer.

353
 FORM 6
(See GRD below Rule 78)

Form of order of Retirement

Government of Rajasthan

seeweanenwanes Department
(३०. ..................---- Dated the ...................-.-
ORDER
Shri/Smt./Kumari WOTKING BS .......-<---०००८०००«०>वत>>
(designation), belonging to (service) is hereby retired from Government
service on attaining the age of superannuation with effect from ............. (date of retirement).

*2. It is certified that no Departmental Enquiry under rule 16 of the Rajasthan Civil
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules is pending against the above named
Government servant, as on today.

Signature

Designation of the
Appointing Authority.

Para of the Order my be suitably modified
if any Departmental Enquiry under rule 16
of RCS(CCA) Rules is pending.

NO: sams 96060 116 .....................-

Copies forwarded to the following for information and necessary action :-

1 Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.
2 Concerned Officer/Official.

3 Personal file of concerned employee.

4.

5

6

7

Signature

Designation

354
 FORM 7

Form for assessing Pension and Gratuity

[See Rules 80,82,83(1) and (3) and 87(1)]

(To be sent in duplicate if payment is desired ina
different circle of accounting unit)

Name of the Government Servant —.........ceeeeeeceeeeeeeteeeetteeteteeteeeee

Father’s name (and also husband’s name in the
case of female Government Servant) .................-------०--००-००-०--०-०---०----

Date of birth (by Christian era) ......................-.------------------०---
REIIQiON ..............................-.-----------""">>न्‍>_-_->>>>>>०>+9०55०595 ५५5५
Permanent residential address, showing village,

town, district and 9196 ...............................--------------------

Present or last appointment including name of
establishment :

(i) Substantive wee
(ii) Officiating, if any

(i) Date of beginning of service ...
(ii) Date of ending of service

Military Service

A. (i) Period of Service for which pension
or gratuity was sanctioned ....................-

(ii) Amount and nature of any
pension/gratuity received for
TNEISAME दी न मी न मम मम मम

8. Period of service for which no Year Month
pension has been earned but
which counts as service under
Rajasthan Government (Rule...) ...............-.--------------

Civil Service
A. Amount and nature of any pension/

Gratuity received for previous
Civil service .................----

5. Period of previous Civil Service
which counts as qualifying service
under Rule .............

355

Days
 10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

Service under other Governments
Service rendered under Government of
India/other State Governments counting
for Pension :-

Name of Government Years Months

Service under Rajasthan Govt.
Service rendered under
Rajasthan Government Years Months

Class of pension applicable >>. ceteteeettteeees

The date on which action initiated to —

(i) obtain the “No demand certificate” from
the Directorate of Estates as provided in
Rule 79.

(ii) assess the service and emoluments quali-
fying for pension as provided in Rule 81
and

(iii) assess the Government dues other than the
dues relating to the allotment of Govern-
ment accommodation as provided in
Rule 94 (1)

Details of omissions, imperfections or defici-
encies in the service book which have been
ignored under Rule 81 (1)(b)(ii) ....................---------

Total length of qualifying service (for the pur-
pose of adding towards broken periods, a
month is reckoned as thirty days) ................-.-----------

Periods of non-Qualifying service—— From To
(i) Interruption in service condoned under
RUIC22 weverosewcey eee seeeeeuenaees
(ii) Extraordinary leave not qualifying for
PSASIGN, ccnccascousewesis ueewmeereccimes  weueccnmensies
(iii) period of suspension not treated as quali-
FYING .................... >>"

(५) Any other service not treated as qualifying

(i) Period of foreign service where pension
contribution is to be paid by the Government
servant [GRD below Rule 88 and 81 (1)(b)(vii)]

Name of organisation Pay scale of
the Govt. Servant
(a)
(b)
(c)
(ii) Details of pension contribution realised.

356

From

Days

To
 17

18.

A. Details of deposit of employer’s share with
interest of C.P.F. in case work charged service
has been counted for pension (GRD1 below rule 14)

Emoluments reckoning for pension
(See rule 45)

(i) Substantive pay (officiating pay also to be reckoned other than appointments

in leave vacancy or additional charge)
(ii) Personal pay

(iii) SP/NPA/NCA/RA(average of last ten
Months as calculated below)

Special pay/NPA/NCA/RA drawn during the
last ten months of service

Post held From To Pay SP/NPA/ Average
NCA/RA Emoluments
(10 months)
1 2 3 4 5 6
19. Date on which Form 5 has been obtained from

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

the Government servant [To be obtained eight
months before the date of retirement of
Government servant.] ........  . cee

Proposed pension
(calculation sheet enclosed)

Proposed retirement gratuity
(calculation sheet enclosed)

Date from which pension is to commence ....

Proposed amount of provisional pension. If
departmental or judicial proceeding is inst-
ituted against the Government servant before
retirement ....... -. wee

Amount of Government dues recoverable out of
Gratuity ——

(i) rent for the allotment of Government
accommodation [See Sub-rules(2),
(3) and (4) of Rule 93.

(ii) Dues referred to in Rule 94 .........
(attach details in Annexure |)

(i) Whether nomination made for retirement
gratuity/death gratuity (if yes, enclose
a copy of the same.)

(ii) Whether nomination made for payment
of L.T.A and commutation amount
and if so, enclose a copy of the
same.

357
 26.

Whether family pension, applies to the
Government servant, and if so—-

(i) emoluments reckoning for the family
PENSION .................. >> ceeeeeeeeeeee

(ii) the amount of the family pension beco-
ming payable to the family of the Gove-
rnment servant, if death takes place
after retirement—

(a) before attaining the age of 65 year, or Rs.....

(b) after attaining the age of 65 years ...... Rs.....

(iii) Complete and up-to-date details of the
family as given in Form 3 :-

S. No. Name of the Date of Relationship with the
member of the family Birth Government servant
(1) (2) (3) (4)
a:
2.
3.
4.
5.
27. Height .................. >>. teneeeseeeeesee seeeeeseeeees
28. Identification MAarkS oo... . "| eeeneeeneees
29. Place of payment of pension ........................ -------------------
(Treasury, Sub-Treasury or Branch of Public
SECO BANK), sccsiccvsserssnrinemnntsrnuurssnerctanctnenmenawareiamonenssemmeaines
30. Details of Provisional Pension and
retirement gratuity paid, if any, in case
pension case is sent after retirement.
Signature of the
Head of Office
Enclosures:-
(1) Details of amount of Government dues
recoverable from gratuity.
(Annexure |)
(2) Calculation sheet (Annexure II)

358
 (3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)

(9)
(10)

(11)

Retirement order (Form 6)
Tentative/final Last Pay Certificate (Form 31)
Certificate for counting officiating pay (Form 32)

Application to the Treasury Officer

for issue of no dues certificate in

respect of long term advances (Form 28)

or certificate of the Government

servant for not taking any L.T.A. (Form 28 A)

Application to Directorate of Estates/P.W.D. for

issue of No Demand Certificate in respect of Government
accommodation (Form 27) or certificate of the Government
servant for not occupying Government accommodation
(Form 27 A)

Nomination for-

(i) Retirement/Death Gratuity; (Form 1 or 2)
(ii) Life Time arrears of pension

(iii) Commuted amount of pension

Application for commutation of pension
(Form 1 or 2 of R.C.S(Commutation) Rules, 1996)

Declaration by the Government servant and
order for admitting service for pension (Form 9 & 9 A)

Form of option for pension in case of work charged
employees

359
 PART Il

Section |
Account enfacement :

1. Total period of qualifying service, which has
been accepted for the grant of
superannuation or retiring or invalid or
compensation or compulsory retirement
pension and gratuity, with reasons for
disallowance, ifany (other than disallowance
indicated in Part | of this Form)

2. Amount of superannuation or retiring or in
valid or compensation or compulsory
retirement pension or gratuity that has been
admitted

2 The date from which superannuation or
retiring or invalid or compensation or
compulsory retirement pension or gratuity is
admissible.........

4. Head of Account to which superannuation
or retiring or invalid or compensation or
compulsory retirement pension or gratuity is
chargeable

5. The amount of the Family Pension
becoming payable to the entitled members
of the family in the event of death of the
Government servant after retirement

Section Il

Name of the Government servant .....>__>->"->-००>--
Class of pension or gratuity
Amount of pension authorized .
Amount of gratuity authorized wee
Date of commencement of pension. ....................---.---

Amount of family pension in the event of death after retirement—-

Ba SON =

(i) if death takes place before 65 years of age,

(ii) if death takes place after 65 years of age .........
7. The Government dues recoverable out of gratuity
before authorising its payment .............-
8. The amount of cash deposit or the amount of
gratuity held over for adjustment of unassessed
Government dues wee eee
9. Date on which the pension papers received by
the Director, Pension........

Director,
Pension Department

360
 ANNEXURE |
to S. No.- 24 of Form 7

Details of amount of Government dues recoverable.

Name of the Government servant :
Designation :

Kind of Amount Amount Balance Basis i.e. Head
Advance Outstan- recovered Principal Interest PWD) T.O./ of credit
ding LPC etc. (No.
ee Date)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

I. Dues of Govt.
accommodation

Il. Long term advance
(i) H.B.A. First
H.B.A. Second
(ii) Repairs Adv.

First
Second
Third
(iii) Conveyance Adv.
First
Second
Third
ll. Other Advances
(i)
(ii
(ili)
IV. Other recoveries
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
Copies of certificate of PWD/Treasury/LPC etc. are attached.
Signature
Designation
Seal

(HEAD OF OFFICE)

In case no amount of Government dues is recoverable, nil may be shown in the

above columns No.4 and 5, and following certificate recorded.

“Certified that no dues are outstanding against the above named Government

servant/pensioner.”

361
 ANNEXURE II
to S. No. 20 & 21 of form 7
CALCULATION SHEET

1. AMOUNT OF PENSION

Emoluments last Completed six monthly period
sean __ x of ——2taualiiing service __ service = Pension Amt.

2. AMOUNT OF RETIREMENT/DEATH GRATUITY.

Emoluments last Completed six monthly period
drawn x of qualifying service = Amount of Ret. /
death Gr.
OR

16.5 times of pay at the time of retirement,whichever is less. This amount should not
be more than Rs. 2.50 lacs.

HEAD OF OFFICE
(Seal)

362
 FORM 8
(See Rule 83)
Form of letter to the Director, Pension
Department Forwarding the pension papers

of a Government Servant.

Government of Rajasthan

ee eeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeneeeeenee Department
परम] Date ...............-.--------००-०---
The Director,
Pension Department
Rajasthan
Jaipur.
Subject:- Pension papers of Shri/Smt./Kumari.......

for authorization of pension.

lam directed to forward herewith the pension papers of Shri/Smt./Kumari_ ...............-

4 पक कक of this Department/Office for further necessary action.

He/She is not a member of C.P.F. and is entitled to Pensionary benefits.

The details of Government dues which will remain outstanding on the date of
retirement of the Government servant and which need to be recovered out of the
amount of retirement gratuity are indicated below :-

(a) Balance of the house building or conveyance advance RS: wenessers

(b) Overpayment of pay and allowances including leave salary RS. ..........
(०) Arrears of license fee for occupation of Government accommodation Rs. ..........
(d) The amount of licence fee for the retention of Government Accommodation for
the permissible period of two months beyond the date of retirement.
RS: मम
(e) The amount of gratuity to be withheld for adjustment of usassessed dues, if any
RS: ताजा

Total

Your attention is invited to the list of enclosures which is forwarded herewith.

The receipt of this letter may be acknowledged and this Department/Office informed
that necessary instructions for the disbursement of pension have been issued to
disbursing authority concerned.

363
 6.

NOTE:

Outstanding Government dues as mentioned in para. 2 above may be recovered out
of the retirement gratuity before making payment.

Yours faithfully,

Head of Office.

List of Enclosures
Form 5. *
Form 7 duly completed alongwith enclosures mentioned therein.
Descriptive Roll in triplicate (From 5 A) *
Medical certificate of incapacity (if the claim is for
invalid pension)
Service Book (date of retirement to be indicated in the

service book)

History of Services-Service Card Part Ill issued by the Accountant General
Rajasthan in case of gazetted officers.

A statement indicating the reasons for delay in case the pension papers are not
forwarded before six months of the retirement of Government servant.

Brief statement leading to reinstatement of the Government servant in case the
Government servant has been reinstated after having been suspended, compulsorily
retired, removed or dismissed from service.

- When initials or name of the Government servant are or is incorrectly given in
the various records consulted, this fact should be mentioned in the letter.

If a Government servant is compulsorily retired from service and delay is anticipated
in obtaining Form 5 and Form 5A from the Government servant, the Head of Office
may forward the pension papers to the Director Pension Department without Form 5
and Form 5A. These Forms may be sent as soon as they are obtained from the
Government servant.

364
 FORM 9
(See rule 81 (1) (a) (vi) )

Form of Declaration by the Government
servant for counting specified period of
service.

(on plain paper)

lis नमन अल कलम लक S/O दल मल नकल न लिन मल लक मन अर लक लक Aged « eens Years
working as (designation) declare that | have served the State Government from .
(0.................-- , and during this period have worked on the ......................- (post) in
(Office/Deptt.). The above period was qualifying for pension under the rules and there was
no break/interruption of any kind during that period.

The documentary evidence and all other information which is in my power to produce
or furnish is enclosed, as listed below :

1.

solemnly affirm and declare that

to the best of my knowledge and belief, the facts stated above are true and correct

DEPONENT

(Signature of the
Government servant)

365
 FORM9A
(See rule 81(1)(a)(vii) )

Form of order for admitting service for
pension on the basis of declaration etc.

of the Government servant.

Certified that the service rendered by Shri/Smt./Ku
at present working as (designation), from . ......... ..on
the post of has been admitted to be continuous and qualifying for
the purpose of calculating the pension of the Government Servant. | am satisfied that there
has been no interruption in the above period of service except the following;

From ...
Front ...
Signature:
Head of Office
Seal
Dated the :

366
 FROM 10
[See Rule 95 (2) ]
Form of letter to the member or members of
the family of a deceased Government servant
where valid nomination for the grant of the

death gratuity exists.

Government of Rajasthan

.... Department

Subject :- Payment of death gratuity in respect of the late Shri/Smt. . ................-.-------
Sir/Madam,

| am directed to state that in terms of the nomination made by the late Shri/Smt. ........
amen (Designation) in the Office/Department of . ..............-------- a
death gratuity is payable to his/her nominee(s). A copy of the said nomination is enclosed
herewith.

2. |.am to request that a claim for the grant of the gratuity may be submitted by you
in the enclosed Form 12.

3. Should any contingency have happened since the date of making the nomination,
so as to render the nomination invalid, in whole or in part, precise details of the contingency
may kindly be stated.

Yours faithfully,

Head of Office

367
 FORM 11
[See Rule 95 (2)]

Form of letter to the member or members of the family of a deceased
Government servant where valid nomination for the grant of the
death gratuity does not exist.

Government of Rajasthan
eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeneees Department

Subject :- Payment of death gratuity in respect of the late Shri/Smt. . ............--------०-----
Sir/Madam,

| am directed to say that in terms of Rule 56 of the Rajasthan Civil Services
(Pension) Rules 1996 a death gratuity is payable to the following members of the family of
lat6 SHGUSIME., sccccocmcrmmeammcsnevnuecsnemmeinasnccnese (Designation), in the Office/Department of
ome in equal shares:

(i) Wife/Husband including judicially separated
wife/husband.

(ii) Sons ) including step children

(iii) Unmarried daughters ) and adopted children

2. In the event of there being no surviving member of the family as indicated above,
the gratuity will be payable to the following members of the family in equal shares :
(i) widowed daughters including step daughters and adopted daughters ;

(ii) father, ) including adoptive parents in case of
(iii) mother, ) individuals whose personal law permits
) adoption ;

(iv) brother below the age of eighteen years and unmarried and widowed
sisters including step brothers and step sisters;

(v) married daughters; and

(vi) children of a pre deceased son.

3. It is requested that a claim for the payment of gratuity may be submitted in the
enclosed Form 12 as soon as possible.

Yours faithfully,

Head of Office,

368
 FORM 12
[See Rule 95 (2)]

Form of application for the grant of death

gratuity on the death of a Government servant

(To be filled in separately by each claimant and in case the claimant is minor, the
Form should be filled in by the guardian on his/her behalf. Where there are more than one
minor, the guardian should claim gratuity in one Form on their behalf)

di: (i) Name of the claimant in case he is not
minor eee
(ii) Date of birth of the claimant
2. (i) Name of the guardian in case the claimants

are Minors cece eee

(ii) Date of birth of the guardian .......

2: (i) Name of the deceased Government servant
in respect of whom gratuity is being
Claimed = ase cee cree:
(ii) Date of death of Government servant ...
(iii) Office/Department in which the deceased
servedlast ....... eee
4. Relationship of the claimant/guardian with the

deceased Government servant ...... .......

5. Full Postal Address of the claimant/guardian

6. (i) Where gratuity is claimed by the guardian on behalf of minors, the names of
the minors, their ages, relationship with the deceased Government servant,
etc.—

Serial Name Age Relationship with the Postal

No. deceased Address

Government servant

Fen =

(ii) Relationship of the guardian with minor

369
 Place of payment of Pension and Gratuity
(Treasury, Sub-Treasury, or Public Sector Bank
BranGh) ccvszcsnecworesreevnmoenevseernecsieres

Signature/Thumb impression
of the claimant/guardian

Two specimen signatures ‘or left hand thumb

and finger impressions of the claimant/guardian
dulyatiesied aoocscs oes see
(To be furnished in a separate sheet)

2Attested by—

Name Full Address Signature

Witnesses:
(i)
(i) ex:

To be furnished in case the applicant is not literate enough to sign his name.

Attestation should be done by two Gazetted Government servants or two or more
persons of respectability in the town, Village or Pargana in which the applicant
resides.

370
 FORM 13
[See Rule 95 (3)]
Form of letter to the widow/widower of
a deceased Government servant for grant
of Family Pension.

Government of Rajasthan

.... Department
0 4 मा 10 “11 न
10,
Subject :- Payment of Family Pension in respect of the late Shri/Smt. . .............---------
Sir/Madam,

| am directed to say that in terms of chapter V c of the Rajasthan Civil Services
(Pension) Rules, 1996 a family pension is payable to you as widow/widower of the late
>11|/ (८1111 न मम (Designation) in the Office/Department Of ..................-------

2. You are advised that a claim for the grant of family pension may be submitted in
the enclosed Form 14.

3. The family pension will be payable till your death or remarriage, whichever event
occurs earlier. In the event of your death or remarriage, the family pension shall be granted
to the child or children, if any through the guardian.

Yours faithfully,

Head of Office

371
 FORM 14
[See Rules 95 (3) and 107 (2)]

Form of application for the grant of Family
Pension on the death of a Government

servant/pensioner

dy Name of the applicant ..................-
(i) Widow/Widowet ....................-
(ii) Guardian if the deceased person is survived by child or children ....................

2. Name and age of surviving Widow/Widower and children of the deceased
Government servant/pensiOne? ..........................------------------

Serial Name Relationship with the Date of Birth

No. deceased person by Christian era

a:

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

3. Name and No. of the P.P.O. of the deceased .शा&0०ा&।.............................---------------

4. Date of death of the Government 58५81॥/7शा&0०ा।ह&............................----.---------------

5. Office/Department in which the deceased Government servant/pensioner served
VASE ...............----०००"००>०>>>>> >> >> 5००5० ०55

6. If the applicant is guardian, his date of birth and relationship with the deceased
Government 58४81॥/720190ा76७............................-...----------------

6.A If the applicant is a widow/widower the amount of service pension which she/he may
be in receipt on the date of death of the husband/Wife .............................---------------

7. Full address of the applicant ................

8. Place of payment of pension and gratuity (Treasury, sub-treasury of Public Sector
Bank 8धा0....................-.-----------०--०--०--०--०---- )

9. Enclosures :
(i) Details of Particulars Form 14A in triplicate

372
 (ii) Certificate(s) of age (in original with two attested copies) showing the dates
of birth of the children. The certificate should be from the Municipal
Authorities or from the local panchayat or from the head of a recognised
school if the child is studying in such school. (This information should be
furnished in respect of such child or children, the particulars of whose date of
birth are not available with the Head of Office).

(iii) Death certificate
(iv) Guardianship certificate in case of minor.
10. Indicate whether family pension is admissible from any other source Military or

Central or any other State Government and/or a public sector undertaking/autonomous
body/local fund under the Central or a State Government ..................----

11. Signature of left hand thumb-impression* of the applicant ................-

12. Attested by :
Name Full Address Signature
(i)
(ii)

13. Witnesses :

(i)
(ii)

Note:- Attestation should be done by two Gazetted Government servants or two or more
persons of respectability in the town, village or Pargana in which the applicant
resides.

To be furnished in case the applicant is not literate enough to sign his name. In the
case of re-marriage of the widow while applying for family pension on behalf of the
minor child, the widow should furnish(i) the date of her re-marriage (ii) name of the
Treasury/Sub-treasury at which payment is desired and (iii) her full address in the
application for family pension. It is not necessary to furnish a fresh application nor
the documents as they are already available with the pension papers on which family
pension was originally admitted to her.

373
 10.

FORM 14A
(Annexure to Form 14
in triplicate)

FORM OF DETAILS OF PARTICULARS FOR FAMILY PENSION

Name of the applicant :

Name of the deceased Government
servant/Pensioner :

Relationship : widow/widower/
son/daughter/
guardian of minor :

Date of birth :
Height :

Signatures :

Left hand thumb and finger
impressions in case not literate
to sign : Thumb Index Middle Ring Little

Personal identification mark :

PresentAddresS : ..........----------------०--------

Name of the Treasury/Branch
of Public Sector Bank through
which the pension is to be drawn : .....................-

Attested photograph :
Attested photograph
Signature of the applicant.
Attested by :

Signature, Name and designation
with seal of the attesting officer.

List of enclosures:-

1.

Three specimen signatures or left hand thumb and finger impressions of the claimant
or guardian duly attested.

Three copies of passport size photographs of the claimant or guardian duly attested.

Three copies of descriptive roll of the claimant or guardian duly attested indicating
height and personal marks.

374
 FORM 15
[See Rule 61 Proviso-!]
Form of application for grant of family
pension when a pensioner is unheard for

more than one year and the pension remained

undrawn.

To

The

(Head of Office in which

the Government Servant was

employed immediately before

retirement).
Sir,

| have to state that my husband/wife Shri/Smt. .....................-.----------"-"""__- ceeseeeeeeeeeeees
was serving in your department as ................ ... (Designation) He/She was retired on
seeeiacemearnanemmeainomverantess (date) on ........... (pension) and was sanctioned pension vide
pension payment order No............ dated .............. and the pension was drawn regularly up
(0..........-

| am to state further that my husband/wife (the above noted pensioner) is missing
from the house and nothing has been heard so far about his whereabouts. | lodged F.I.R.
with the Police, who investigated the case and found that Shri/Smt. ........................---------------
is not traceable/found. True copies of the F.I.R./F.R. are enclosed herewith for perusal.

It is therefore, requested that family pension as admissible as per first proviso to
Rule 61 of Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules in force, may please be sanctioned to
the applicant from the date my husband/wife is missing/unheard.

Yours faithfully,

(Applicant)

Home Address

Date :
Place :
Copy forwarded to the Treasury Officer . ..........................------------------------- for information.

(Applicant)

Note:- Form may be suitably revised if the eligible member for family pension is child.

375
 FORM 15A
(See proviso | to Rule 61)
AFFIDAVIT

(In case of missing pensioner)

Husband/Witecof Shri/SiMt. ....................-------------------

resident of. (Tehsil) District ... State,
do hereby take oath and state as under :

1. That | am the applicant for the grant of Family pension as my wife/husband
SESH, ssccncarencssnccmmearimemecsacneneseawenantes is missing/unheard for more than
one year and could not be traced by the police.

2: That | am the rightful claimant of family pension in this case.

3. That the contents mentioned in the enclosed application are true and correct

to my personal knowledge.

DEPONENT
VERIFICATION
|, the above named deponent do hereby take oath and verify that the contents of
$ROS ccc of the affidavit are true and correct to my personal
knowledge. No part of it is false. Nothing has been concealed. So help me God.

DEPONENT

Date : Address :
Place :

376
 FORM 15B
[See Rule 61 proviso 1]
FORM OF INDEMNITY BOND

[In the case of missing pensioner]

KNOW ALL MEN by these presents that we (a). ..............---------०--०------ (0)... ...........--
the widow/son/brother/nominee, etc., Of (०)...............-.--- who had retired from the

post of in the Department/Office Of ......................-------- and who was in
receipt of pension 10! ...................- is reported to have been missing since. .................-
(hereinafter referred to as missing pensioner) resident ०$......................-------- (hereinafter
called “the Obligor”) and (d) ................... son/wife/daughter Of 9#7,.................-.--------०--०--०----

resident of. 810 .......................- son/wife/daughter Of ....................-.--------
resident of the sureties for and on behalf of the Obligor (hereinafter
called “the Sureties”) are held firmly bound to the Governor of Rajasthan (hereinafter called
“the Government’) in each and every sum being the arrears of pension and monthly family
pension and relief thereon well and truly to be paid to the Government on demand and
without a demur together with simple interest at the rate of.......... % per annum from the date
of payment until repayment for which payment we bind ourselves and our respective heirs,
executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors and assigns by these presents.

Signed this

WHEREAS (©) nacunsannnomenes was at the time of his disappearance a Government
pensioner receiving a pension at the rate of २5५. .................-.-------- (in words) only per month
and relief thereon from the Government.

AND WHEREAS the said (०)..................-------- disappeared on ॥16.......................- day
01 19 cessed and there was due to him at the time of his disappearance the sum
equivalent of arrears of pension due.

AND WHEREAS the Obligor is’ entitled to family pension वा
1२५...................------- (+२५०663..................-.--------- only) plus admissible dearness relief thereon.

AND WHEREAS the Obligor has represented that he/she is entitled to the aforesaid
sum and approached the Government for making payment thereof to avoid undue delay and
hardship.

AND WHEREAS the Government has agreed to make payment of the said sum of
1२५............................-------- (in words) and the monthly family pension at Rs.. ......................-
(in words) plus relief thereon to the obligor upon the obligor and
the sureties entering in to a Bond in the above mentioned sum to indemnify the Government
against all claims to the amount so due to the aforesaid missing Government pensioner.

AND WHEREAS the obligor and at his/her request the surety/sureties have agreed
to execute the Bond in the terms and manner hereinafter contained.

NOW THE CONDITION OF THIS BOND is such that if after payment has been
made to the obligor, the obligor and/or the surety/sureties shall in the event of a claim being
made, by any other person or the missing pensioner on appearance, against the
Government or in the event of any financial/monitory loss, caused on account of any wrong
facts mentioned in application for the grant of family pension with respect to the aforesaid
SUM Of RS. .......................-.-.--- (in words) and the sums paid by the Government as monthly
family pension and relief as aforesaid then refund to the Government the said sum of

377
 1२५............................--------- (in words) and each and every sum paid by Government as
monthly family pension and relief together with simple interest @........ % per annum and
shall, otherwise, indemnify and keep the Government harmless and indemnified against and
from all liabilities in respect of the aforesaid sums and all costs incurred in consequence of
the claim there to THEN the above written Bond or obligation shall be void and of no effect
but otherwise it shall remain in full force, effect and virtue.

AND THESE PRESENTS ALSO WITNESS that the liability of the surety/sureties
hereunder shall not be impaired or discharged by reason or time being granted by or any
forbearance act or omission of the Government whether with or without the knowledge or
consent of the surety/sureties in respect of or in relation to the obligations or conditions to be
performed or discharged by the Obligor or by any other method or thing whatsoever which
under the law relating to sureties would but for this provision shall have no effect of so
releasing the surety/sureties from such liability nor shall it be necessary for the Government
to sue the obligor before suing the surety/sureties or either of them for the amount due
hereunder, and the Government agrees to bear the stamp duty, if any, chargeable on these
presents.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the obligor and the surety/sureties hereto have set and
subscribed their respective hands hereunto on the day, month and year above written.

Signed by the above-named “obligor” in the presence of :-

(i)
(ii)
Signed by the above-named “Surety/Sureties”
(i)
(ii)

Accepted for and on behalf of the Governor of Rajasthan

[Name and designation of the office directed or authorised, in pursuance of Article 299 (1) of
the constitution, to accept the bond for and on behalf of the Governor] in the presence of

(Name and designation of witness)

Note :- |. (a) Full name of the claimant referred to as the “obligor”
(b) State relationship of the “obligor” to the “missing pensioner”.
(c) Name of the “missing pensioner”

(d) full name or names of the sureties with name or names of the father
(s) husband(s) and place of residence.

Note:- Il. The obligor as well as the sureties should have attained majority so that the
bond may have legal effect or force.

Note:-lll. The rate of simple interest will be as prescribed by the Government from time
to time.

378
 FORM 16
(See proviso 2 to Rule 61)
Form of application for grant of family
pension when a Government servant is unheard

of for more than one year.

To

The

(Head of Office where the Government servant was last working)
Sir,

| have to state that my husband/wife Shri/Smt
was serving in your department. ......................-.--------- as ....

| am to state further that my husband/wife (the above noted Government servant) is
missing from the house and nothing has been heard so far about his whereabouts. | lodged
F.I.R. with the police who investigated the case and found that 91#॥#/9#7.......................-.--------
is not traceable/found. True copies of the F.I.R./F.R. are enclosed herewith for perusal.

It is, therefore, requested that family pension as admissible as per second proviso to

Rule 61 of Rajasthan Civil services (Pension) Rules in force, may please be sanctioned to
the applicant from the date my husband/wife is missing/unheard.

Yours faithfully,

(Applicant’s signature)

Name _ :-

Home Address :-

379
 FORM 16 A
(See proviso 2 to rule 61)
FORM AFFIDAVIT
(In case of a missing Government Servant)
husband/wife Shri/Smt. .............-.---""__"__________> जन ०5-5०

resident of . .... ve (TONSI) 55०७-७७ 2 Dist iCloswcenmmemaceensey State, do hereby
take oath and state as under:-

1. That | am the applicant for the grant of Family pension as my wife/husband
SHSM. oo... cece eeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeneeeeeee is missing/unheard for more than one
year and could not be traced by the police.

2. That! am the rightful claimant of Family pension in this case.

3. That the contents mentioned in the enclosed application are true and correct to
my personal knowledge.

DEPONENT

VERIFICATION
|, the above named deponent do hereby take oath and verify that the contents of
PAPAS ..........................-------------०---०-०----०--- of the affidavit are true and correct to my personal
knowledge. No part of it is false. Nothing has been concealed. So help me God.

DEPONENT

Date : Address :

Place :

380
 FORM 16 8
(Proviso 2 to Rule 61)
FORM OF INDEMNITY BOND

(In the case of missing Government servant)

KNOW ALL MEN by these presents that we (9)........................--.----- (00) दल क the
widow/son/brother/nominee, etc., of (c) who was holding the post of
ee in the Deptt./Office of is reported to have been missing
since . (hereinafter referred to as ‘missing Government servant’) resident of ........
weceei (hereinafter called “the obligor’) and (d) . .... son/wife/daughter
SRR resident of ........ and son/wife/daughter
. resident of ..... - AND .................----------
son/wife/daughter of .... resident.Of मम मम मम the sureties
for and on behalf of the obligor (hereinafter called “the Sureties”) are held firmly bound to the
Governor of Rajasthan (hereinafter called “the Government”) in the sum of २५................-
(in words) equivalent of the amount on account of payment of salary, leave encashment,
G.P.F., Retirement/Death Gratuity and each and every sum being the monthly family
pension well and truly to be paid to the Government on demand and without a demur
together with simple interest @ ........... % p.a. from the date of payment thereof until
repayment for which payment we bind ourselves and our respective heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors and assigns by these presents.

Signed this .............------ 022) 151 न one thousand nine hundred anid ............

WHEREAS (c) was at the time of his disappearance in the employment of the
Government receiving a pay at the rate of २३५..........................-.----------- (in words) only per
month from the Government.

AND WHEREAS the said (C) .......................-- disappeared on the ......................- day
र्0ा...........- 19 ......... and there was due to him at the time of his disappearance the sum

equivalent of (i) salary due/(ii) leave encashment, (iii) G.P.F. and (iv) Retirement/Death
Gratuity.

AND WHEREAS the obligor is entitled to family pension at

RS: sms (RUPCES accuser only) plus admissible dearness
relief thereon.

AND WHEREAS the obligor has represented that he/she is entitled to the aforesaid
sum and approached the Government for making payment thereof to avoid undue delay and
hardship.

AND WHEREAS the Government has agreed to make payment of the said sum of
Rs.... (in words) and monthly family pension @
Rs.... (in words) only and relief thereon to the Obligor upon
the Obligor and the Sureties entering into a Bond in the above mentioned sum to indemnify
the Government against all claims to the amount so due to the aforesaid missing
Government servant.

AND WHEREAS the Obligor and at his/her request the Surety/Sureties have agreed
to execute the Bond in the terms and manner hereinafter contained.

NOW THE CONDITION OF THIS BOND is such that if after payment has been
made to the Obligor, the Obligor and/or the Surety/Sureties shall in the event of a claim
being made, by any other person or the missing employee on appearance, against the
Government or in the event of any financial/monetary loss causes on account of any wrong
facts mentioned in application for the grant of family pension with respect to the aforesaid

381
 SUM Of २३५..........................-.-----------०---०------ (in words) and the sums paid by the Government
as monthly pension and relief as aforesaid then refund to the Government the said sum of
1२५............................------------०---०------ (in words) and each and every sum paid by Government
as monthly pension and relief together with simple interest @......% per annum and shall,
otherwise indemnify and keep the Government harmless and indemnified against and from
all liabilities in respect of the aforesaid sums and all costs incurred in consequence of the
claim thereto THEN the above-written Bond or obligation shall be void and of no effect but
otherwise it shall remain in full force, effect and virtue.

AND THESE PRESENTS ALSO WITNESS that the liability of the Surety/Sureties
hereunder shall not be impaired or discharged by reason of time being granted by or any
forbearance act or omission of the Government whether with or without the knowledge or
consent of the Surety/Sureties in respect of or in relation to the obligations or conditions to
be performed or discharged by the Obligor or by any other method or thing whatsoever
which under the law relating to sureties would but for this provision shall have no effect of so
releasing the Surety/Sureties from such liability nor shall it be necessary for the Government
to sue the Obligor before suing the Surety/Sureties or either of them for the amount due
hereunder, and the Government agrees to bear the Stamp duty, if any, chargeable on these
presents.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Obligor and the Surety/Sureties hereto have set and
subscribed their respective hands hereunto on the day, month and year above written.

Signed by the above named
‘Obligor’ in the presence of

Accepted for and on behalf of the Governor of Rajasthan 0५ .........................-----------------०----

(Name and designation of the Officer directed or authorised in pursuance of Article
299(1) of the Constitution, to accept the Bond for and on behalf of the Governor) in the
presence of. wee

(Name and designation of witness)

NOTE L.- (a) Full name of the claimant referred to as the ‘Obligor’.
(b) State relationship of the ‘Obligor’ to the missing Government servant.
(c) Name of the ‘missing Government servant’.
(d) Full name or names_ of the Sureties with name or names of the father
(s)/husband(s) and place of residence.

NOTE II. - The Obligor as well as the Sureties should have attained majority so that
the bond may have legal effect or force.

NOTE Ill.- 116 rate of simple interest will be as prescribed by the Government from time
to time.

382
 FORM 17
[See rule 75 and 76]
Form of Application for ex-gratia grant
under certain circumstances.

(To be submitted in duplicate)

To
व॥6..................--------०--------०----०---०---०-----
(Head of Deptt./Collector)
(To be submitted through the Head of Office in
Which the deceased was last employed).
Sir,

| have to state that my
was serving in the ...
who died while on duty.

(designation)

PARTICULARS

1. Name of the applicant
(entitled for family
pension/death gratuity)
in case of non-Govt.
servants).

2. Details of the family
pension if sanctioned
(PPO No. and Amount).

3. Name of the deceased
Government servant.

4. Relationship of the
applicant to the deceased
Government servant.

5. Date of death of the
Government servant while
on duty.

6. Circumstances in which

death took place —-

Rule 75
(a) Outside his normal headquarters,

(b) in an accident,

383
 (e)
(f)

RULE 76

(a)

(b)

due to injury intentionally inflicted or caused in consequence of the due
performance of his duties,

due to injury intentionally inflicted or caused in consequence of his official
position,

by violence attributable to causes relative to his service,

while on duty, at own headquarter or outside headquarter, in connection with
special assignments like “Election duty’, “Census work” and/or such other

assignments which do not fall within normal duties of the post held.

Injury intentionally inflicted by a terrorist in case of Police Civil Defence and
Home Guard personnel.

Attack by poachers on Forestry personnel.

(Note:-Write “Yes” against the circumstance which is applicable and strike out
which is not applicable.)

te

8.

9.

Emoluments of the deceased Government servant on the day of death :

Amount of ex-gratia grant admissible
(a) Under rule 75 [2], or

(b) Under GRD 1 below rule 75, or
(c) Under GRD 2 below rule 75, or
(d) Under rule 76 (1).

Full address of the applicant.

It is requested that ex-gratia grant as admissible under Rule 75 or 76 of Rajasthan
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, in force may please be sanctioned to the applicant.

Place :
Date :

Witness :

Yours faithfully,

Signature of the applicant
or left hand thumb impression
in case of illiterate.

Attested by a Gazetted Officer
(Seal)

(Note : in case of application under rule 76, the Head of the Department shall forward the
same to the concerned Administrative Secretary, for sanction.)

384
 Noa (०

10.

FORM 18

[See Rules 96 (1), 98 (1),(3) and (5)
and 100 (1) and (5)]

Form for assessing and authorising
the payment of family pension and
death gratuity when a Government servant
dies while in service.

PART |

Section |

Name of the deceased Government 56५87 .................-

Father’s name (and also husband’s name in the ...........
case of female Government servant)

Date of Birth (by Christian era) ...................-----

Date of death (by Christian era) ..................------
RGIQION aneco मा
Office/Department in which last employed ................
Appointment held last .................-.-----------०----

(i) Substantive

(ii) Officiating

(i) Date of beginning of service .....................---
(ii) Date of ending of service ......................-.--
Military Service

A. (i) Period of service for which pension

or gratuity was 5870010160.........................--

(ii) Amount and nature of any
pension/gratuity received for the same ..............

B. Period of service for which no Years Months
pension has been earned but
which counts as service under
Rajasthan Government (Rule.....)

Civil Service

A. Amount and nature of any pension/
Gratuity received for previous
GIVI SONVICE का न

8. Period of previous Civil Service
which counts as qualifying service under Rule.......

385

(To be sent in duplicate if payment is desired in a different Circle of accounting unit)

Days
 11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

Service under other Governments

Service rendered under GOI/
others state Governments counting
for pension:-

Name of Government Years Months

Service under Rajasthan Government

Service Rendered under Years Months
Rajasthan Government

Days

Days

Government under which’ service has been rendered in_ order

employment..........:::::ececeseeseeteteeeees

of

The date on which intimation regarding the death of Government servant was

received by the head of office ........................-..----------

The date on which action initiated to -

(i) obtain claim or claims from the claimants
in the appropriate form for death gratuity
and family pension as provided in Rule 95,

(ii) obtain the ‘No demand certificate’ from
the Directorate of Estates as provided in
Rule 101 (1);

(iii) assess the Government dues other than the
dues pertaining to occupation of Government
accommodation as provided in Rule
101 (2), and ;

(iv) assess the service and emoluments qualifying
for death gratuity and family pension
as provided in Rules (96) and (97).

Whether nomination made for death gratuity, if so, attach a copy

Length of service qualifying for death gratuity/pension.............
(Service card issued by A.G. Rajasthan)

Periods of non-qualifying service-

(i) Interruption in service condoned under
Rule (27) .................

(ii) Extraordinary leave not qualifying for
Gratuity ...................--

(iii) Period of suspension treated as non qualifying

(iv) Any other service not treated as qualifying service

Total period of non qualifying service

386

From

To
 19. (i) Period of foreign service where
pension contribution is to be paid
by the Government servant
[GRD below Rule 88 and 81 (1)(b) (vii)]

Name of Organisation Pay scale of From To
the Govt. servant

(a)

(b)

(०)

(ii) Details of Pension Contribution realised.
20. Details of deposit of employer's share with

interest of C.P.F. incase work charged service
has been counted for pension
(GRD | below rule 14)

21. Emoluments reckoning for death gratuity
(see 1७॥७ 45) ............... names

(i) Substantive pay
(officiating pay also to be reckoned
other than appointment in leave Vacancy
or additional charge)

(ii) Personal pay
(iii) *S.P./PAY/N.P.A/N.C.A./R.A. (average of last 10 months as calculated below)
*S.P./N.P.A./N.C.A/R.A.-

drawn during the last ten months of service

Post held From To Pay NPA/NCA pay or + Average
Special pay / RA Emoluments
(10 months)
1 2 3 4 5 6

Special pay other than for additional charge.

22. Amount of death gratuity
(Calculation sheet)

23. (i) Proposed Family Pension at Annexure II

(a) enhanced rate [if service rendered at
the time of death is more than seven
years as in Rule 62 (ii) (iii)]

(b) ordinary rates-[as in Rule 62(i)]

(ii) Period of tenability of Family Pension From To
(a) enhanced rates ........................------
(b) Ordinary rates scissors

24. Persons to whom family pension is payable
NAM Giscsccssconmenwewrerercessiers
 25. Amount of Government dues recoverable out of gratuity

(i) Rent for occupation of Government
accommodation [See Rule 101] ................-

(ii) Amount of death Gratuity to be held over
pending receipt of information from the
Directorate of Estates
[See Rule 101 (i) (v)

(iii) Dues referred to in Rule 101 (2)
(Attach details in Annexure |)

26. Date on which claims received from the claimants

27. Name of guardian who will receive payment of
death gratuity and family pension in the case
OF MINOMS. weve सववसवननस्‍नक्३त seereevses

28. Place of payment (Treasury , Sub Treasury or
Branch of Public Sector Bank) ............... ..-.---------

Place Signature of
Dated the Head of Office
Section Il
Details of provisional family pension and gratuity to be drawn and disbursed by the
Head of Office in accordance with Rule 99 provisional family pension २३५.....................- p.m.
Gratuity [75% of the amount mentioned in item 22 of part |] ................-.------- RB kvitssesewancene

Less

(a) rent recoverable from gratuity for
occupation of Government accommodation [As in item 25

COUPE nsmuccmmmmcccs Poca
(b) Amount of gratuity to be held over pending receipt of information from the
Directorate of Estates [as in item 25 (ii) of part I] ............ Ruomonussaue
(c) Other Government dues as mentioned in
item 25 (ili) Of Part | है मम RS न मा मम मम मम nays
(0) total of (a),(b) and (०) ...................-.------- 1२६....................---------------
Place Signature of
Dated the Head of Office

Enclosures to Form 18

1. Details of Amount of Government dues recoverable from Gratuity
(Annexure | S.No.25)
2. Calculation Sheet.

(Annexure II-S Nos.22 & 23)

388
 जि छ छा के

Application for grant of family pension (Form 14) alongwith its enclosures.

Details of particulars for Family Pension (Form 14 A) may be attached in triplicate.
Last Pay Certificate (Form 31).

Certificate for counting officiating pay (Form 32)

Nomination for Death Gratuity (Form 1 or 2)

Form of option to work charged employees governed by CPF Rules. (Form 4).

389
 soo s

Place

PART Il
Account Enfacement
Section |

Total period of qualifying service which has been accepted for :-

(i) Death gratuity

(ii) Family Pension

(i) Amount of Gratuity

(ii) Net amount of gratuity after adjusting Government
60968 en

Amount and the period of tenability of family Pension, if death took place —

Amount Period of
tenability
Rs. From To

(i) Before seven years service
(ii) after seven years service

Death from which Family Pension is admissible

Head of Account to which death gratuity and
family pension are chargeable ...........................--------

Section Il

Name of the deceased Government Servant ......................-------------
Date of death of the Government Servant ....................---------------

Date on which pension papers received by the
Director, Pension ............. ............... ------------- --

Amount of family pension authorised ..............................----
Amount of gratuity authorised ..................... .....------------------
Date of commencement of family pension ....................-------

Date on which payment of family pension and
gratuity authorised

Amount recoverable from gratuity

Amount of gratuity held over pending receipt
of “No demand certificate” .....................--------------

Director, Pension

Dated, the

390
 ANNEXURE |
(to S.No.25 of Form 18)
Details of amount of Government dues recoverable.

Name of the Government servant :
Designation ;

Kind of Amount Amount Balance Basis i.e. Head
Advance Outstan- recovered Principal Interest PWD/ T.O./ of credit
ding LPC etc.
(NR Date)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

I. Dues of Government
accommodation

Il. Long term advances.

(i) H.B.A. First
H.B.A. Second
(ii) Repairs Adv.

First
Second
Third
(iii) Conveyance Adv.
First
Second
Third
I. Other Advances
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
IV. Other recoveries
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Copies of certificate of PWD/Treasury/LPC etc. are attached.

Signature
Designation
Seal (HEAD OF OFFICE)

In case no amount of Government dues is recoverable, nil may be shown in the
above columns No.4 and 5, and following certificate recorded :

“Certified that no dues are outstanding against the above named Government
servant/pensioner.”

391
 ANNEXURE II
(to S.No. 22 & 23 of Form 18)

Calculation Sheet.

1. AMOUNT OF DEATH GRATUITY.

Length of qualifying service

Less than one year Emoluments * 2 = RStcssssnsrennmrnece

One year or more but

less than five year Emoluments x 6 =Rs

Five years or more but

less than twenty years Emoluments x 12 =Rs

Twenty years or more Emoluments x Completed six =
monthly periods
of service

2

not exceeding

33 times of

emoluments.
This amount should not be more than Rs. 2.50 lacs.

॥. AMOUNT OF FAMILY PENSION

Emoluments atthe © ...............- percent
(i) time of death x asperslab =RS. ...........................-------- (i)
(ii) Minimum Family pension in the slab : Rs

(iii) Maximum Family pension in the slab : Rs. ...
Amount of Family pension determined
based on (i), (ii), & (iii) : Rs........ per mensem

Il. AMOUNT OF FAMILY PENSION AT
ENHANCED RATES (if service
rendered is 7 years or more).
(a) (1) Fifty percent of Emoluments i.e.

Emoluments = २५.................-

(2) Double the amount of pension
determined in S.No. ॥ Above. २५.................. X2= RS.
whichever is less i.e. RS. ............... .... per mensem.

(b) Where Workmen’s Compensation Act is applicable:
(1) Fifty percent of Emoluments i.e.
Emoluments = २५...............-.-

(2) One and half times the amount
of pension determined in
S.No. Il above. २३5..................
Whichever is less i.e. Rs.

The amount under (a) or (0) shall not exceed Rs. 2,500 p.m.

392
 FORM 19
[See Rule 98 (1)]

Form of letter to the Director, Pension
Department forwarding papers for the grant
of family pension and death gratuity to the
family of a Government servant who dies while
in service.

Government of Rajasthan
ee Department

(७०. .........................-- Dated the ........................-

To,

The Director,
Pension & Pensioner’s Welfare Department,
Rajasthan, Jaipur.

Subject :- Grant of family pension and death gratuity.

| am directed to say that Shri

Designation ........................-.-----------------०--------- ly
become eligible for the grant of family pension and death gratuity. Form 18 duly completed
is forwarded herewith for further necessary action.

2.

Government dues in respect of the deceased Government servant may be recovered
out of the death gratuity as indicated in Section II of part | of Form 18.

Your attention is invited to the list of enclosures which is forwarded herewith.

The receipt of this letter may be acknowledged and this Department/Office informed
that necessary instructions for the disbursement of family pension and death gratuity
have been issued to the disbursing authority concerned.

Yours faithfully,

Head of Office

List of enclosures

Pon

Form 18 duly completed.
Service book (date of death to be indicated in the service book).
History of service-service card part Ill issued by AG. Rajasthan.

Three specimen signatures or left hand thumb and finger impressions of the
claimant or guardian duly attested.

Three copies of passport size photographs of the claimant or guardian duly attested.

Three copies of descriptive roll of the claimant or guardian duly attested indicating
height and personal marks.

Postal address of the claimant or guardian.

393
 FORM 20
[See Rule 107 (2)]

Form of letter sanctioning Family Pension
to the child or children of a retired
Government servant who dies after retirement

but does leave behind a widow or widower

Government of Rajasthan

ee Department
ING csawciinovswemcenanecineow Dated the ...... eee
To,
Subject:- Grant of Family Pension to the Child/Children.

Sir,

| am directed to say that Shri/Smt. ......................-.-------------- Formerly ........................--
(Designation)
in this Department was authorised pension Of RS. ............................-----------०-----०-- with effect

FOND \csscscenscennesnerese on his/her retirement from service.

2. Intimation has been received in this Department/Office that Shri/Smt. ..................-...--
0160 01 vecerpreecewsnenerveers and that at the time of death left no widow/widower but was
survived by the following children*:-

5. Name Son / Date of Birth Date from which

No. Daughter by Christian family pension ceases

era to be payable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

3. In terms of Ch. Vc of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, the

amount of Family Pension has become payable to the children in the order
mentioned above. The Family Pension will be payable on behalf of the minor to
Shri/Smt. ............----- who is the guardian.

394
 Sanction for the grant of Family Pension of २३..................------- per month to the
children mentioned above is hereby accorded. The Family pension will take effect
101 ......................-.-.------- and subject to the provisions of Rule 67 of | the Rajasthan
civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 will be tenable ॥॥ ................-

5. Attention is invited to the information furnished in the list of enclosures.

6. The receipt of this letter may kindly be acknowledged and this Department/Office
informed that instructions for the payment of Family Pension, to the guardian have
been issued to the disbursing authority concerned.

Yours faithfully,
Head of Office
List of enclosures

1. Permanent address of the guardian .

2. Place of payment (Government Treasury, Sub-Treasury or Branch of Public Sector
Bank).

2: Specimen signature or **left hand thumb and finger impressions of the claimant or
guardian duly attested.

4. Three attested copies of passport size photograph of the guardian.

5. Descriptive roll of the guardian, duly attested.

6. Death Certificate.

हर

The names of children should be mentioned in the order of eligibility mentioned in
Rule ... of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules.
1996, Children born as a result of marriage which took place before the retirement of
the Government servant or children adopted legally before retirement should only be
included but children born after retirement should not be included.

To be furnished in the case of the guardian who is not literate enough to sign his or
her name.

395
 FORM 21
[See rule 107 (2)]
Form of letter sanctioning Family Pension
to the child or children on the death

or remarriage of a widow/widower who was
in receipt of Family Pension

Government of Rajasthan

ae eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeee Department
0 नि न मय Dated the ...................------
To,
The Director,
Pension & Pensioner’s Welfare Department,
Rajasthan, Jaipur.
Subject :- Grant of Family pension to the Child/children.
Sir,
| am directed to say that Shri/SMt. ......................---------------------०-०------०--- widow/widower
Of late: SHSM. scccivcccnsccmcnceesneinucdommecunamrcnenenemenanmarencacins 1101 11:10 8 कम मम मल नमन मम
(Designation)

in this Department/Office was authorised the payment of Family Pension of Rs. ...................-
with effect frOM .....................-.--------- the Family Pension was tenable till the death or
remarriage of the widow/widower.

2. Intimation has been received in this Department/Office that Shri/Smt. ...........
died/Re-married ON ...................-.-------------

3. At the time of death /re-marriage Shri/Smt. ..............-------""">_"_________्__्_-_----+- had
following children*:-

5. Name Son / Date of Birth Date from which

No. Daughter by Christian family pension ceases

era to be payable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

* The names of children should be mentioned in the order of eligibility mentioned in
Ch. V c of the Rajasthan civil Services(pension) Rules, !996.

4. In terms of Ch. Vc of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996 the

amount of Family pension has become payable to the children in the order
mentioned above. The family Pension will be payable on behalf of the minors to
Shri/Smt. ... ...who is the guardian.

396
 Sanction for the grant of Family Pension RS. ...........................------------ per month to
the children, mentioned above is hereby accorded. The Family Pension will take
GHOCL TOM scciissecercnccemmnerniccieisrnmenneiee and subject to the provisions of Rule-67 of
the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1996, will be tenable till ..................-
Attention is invited to the information furnished in the list of enclosures.

The Receipt of this letter may kindly be acknowledged and this Department/Office
informed that necessary instructions for the payment of Family Pension to the
guardian have issued to the disbursing officer concerned.

yours faithfully

Head of Office

List of enclosures
Permanent address of the guardian.

Place of payment (Government Treasury, Sub-Treasury,
Branch of Public Sector Bank).

Specimen Signature of left *hand thumb and finger impressions of the guardian duly
attested.

Three Attested copies of passport size photograph of the guardian.
Descriptive roll of the guardian, dully attested.

Death Certificate.

To be furnished in the case of the guardian who is not literate enough to sign his or
her name.

397
 N

छू का an oa ©

FORM 22

[See Rule 107 (3)]

Form of application for the grant of Residuary

Gratuity on the death of a pensioner

(To be filled in separately by each applicant)

Name of the applicant .....................----

(i) Name of the guardian in case the applicant is a 11101 ......................---------

(ii) Date of birth of guardian ...............

Name of the deceased pensioner ...............

Office/Department in which the deceased pensioner served last ........................---------
Date of death of the pensioner .................-

Date of retirement of the deceased pensioner .....

Amount of monthly ‘pension sanctioned to deceased pensioner ................................-
Amount of retirement gratuity received by the deceased pensionet ....................-.-------
The amount of @pension drawn by the deceased till the date of death .........................

If the deceased had commuted a portion of pension before his death, the commuted
value of the pension

Total of items 8,9 and 10

Amount of death gratuity equal to 12 times of the emoluments .......................-------------

The amount of residuary gratuity claimed, i.e., the difference between the amount
shown against items 12 and 11 ....................-.--------

Relationship of the applicant with the deceased pensioner ..........................-..--------
Date of birth of the applicant .................

Name of the Treasury or Sub-treasury at which payment is desired ....

Full Address of the applicant ................

Signature or thumb-impression of the applicant
(To be furnished in a separate sheet duly Attested*)

Attested By :

Name Full Address Signature
(i)
(ii)

398
 20.

Witnesses:

If a retired Government servant in receipt of service gratuity or pension dies within
five years from the date of his retirement from service including compulsory
retirement as a penalty and the sums actually received by him at the time of his
death on account of such gratuity or pension together with the death-cum-retirement
gratuity and the commuted value of any portion of pension commuted by him are
less than the amount equal to 12 times of his emoluments, a residuary gratuity equal
to the deficiency becomes payable to the family.

When a Government servant has retired before earning a pension, the amount of
service gratuity should be indicated.

Attestation should be done by two Gazetted Government servants or by two or more
persons of respectability in the town, panchayat in which the applicant resides.

399
 FORM 23
[See Rule 35 (3)]
FORM OF MEDICAL CERTIFICATE

“Certified that I/(We) have carefully examined A B son of ७ 0 @ oes in
TAG stecsstcrerensrrerenvenene His age by his own statement is ..................------- years, and by
appearance about .. years. I/(We) consider AB to be completely and
permanently incapacitated for further service of any kind in the department to which he
belongs in consequence of (here state disease or cause)”. His incapacity does not appear to
me (us) to have been caused by irregular or intemperate habits.

If the incapacity is the result of irregular or intemperate habits, the following will be
substituted for the last sentence:

is directly due to
In my (our).... opinion his incapacity, ——------------- ——__—_—_—_——
has been accelerated
or aggravated by
irregular or intemperate habits.

(If the incapacity does not appear to be complete and permanent, the certificate
should be modified accordingly and the following addition should be made.)

“| am/We are of opinion that A B is fit further service of a less laborious character
than that which he had been doing/may, after resting for .....................--------------०--०---- months,
be fit for further service of less laborious character than that which he had been doing.”

Medical Authority
Place
Dated, the

400
 FORM 24
[See Rule 29]
Form of certificate of verification of service for pension

NO! न मम
Government of Rajasthan
Department of .........
Dated 2७-७८

CERTIFICATE

It is clarified, in consultation with the senior most member of Rajasthan Accounts

Service, that Shri Designation has

completed a qualifying service of months, and ...
days aS ON .................- (date), as per details given below,. The service has been verified on

the basis of his service documents and in accordance with the rules regarding qualifying
service in force at present. The verification of service under sub rules (1) and (2) or rule 29
of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Pension) rules 1996, shall be subject to final verification of
qualifying service which shall be made at the time of retirement of the Government Servant.

DETAILS OF QUALIFYING SERVICE

From To
1.
Signature of Head of Office
To,
91 ..................-------

(Name and Designation)

401
 FORM 25
[See Rule 9]

Form of application for permission to State
service officers to accept commercial employment
within a period of two years after retirement

1. Name of the (66 ................... eee
(in BLOCK letter)
2. Date of retirement
3. Particulars of the Deptt./Offices in
which the officer served during the last 5 years
preceding retirement (with duration):
Name of Duration
Department / Office : Post held : From To
4. Post held at the time of retirement and period
110॥8/(॥01॥11- 6 मा ureeereneese
5. Pay scale of the post and pay drawn by the
Officer at the time of retirement ...............--- eee
6. Pensionary benefits :

Pension expected/sanctioned
(commutation if any, should
be mentioned)

Gratuity, if any

Details regarding commercial employment
proposed to be taken up—-

(a) Name of the firm/company/Co-operative
SOC CIC: ccccrccccsnime sememvenes

(b) Products being manufactured by the firm/
type of business carried out by the firm,
110 न accel

(०) Whether the official had during his official
career, any dealings with the firm, etc. ...

(d) Duration and nature of the official dealings
WIth the fi! cscs eae

(e) Name of the job/post offered .........................-

(f) Whether post was advertised, if not, how
was offer made (attach newspaper cutting
of the advertisement, and a copy of the
offer of appointment, if any)

402
 Dated:

(g) Description of the duties of the job/post
(h) Remuneration offered for post/job .......

(i) If proposing to set up a practice,
indicate—

(a) Professional qualification/in the field
OP १ 7> 011७ - है अमन न मनन

(0) Nature of proposed practice .................-

Any information which the applicant desires
to furnish in support of his request

Declaration :

| hereby declare that—-

(i) The employment which | propose to take up will not bring me into conflict with
Government;
(ii) my commercial duties will not be such that my previous official position or

knowledge or experience under Government could be used to give my
proposed employer an unfair advantage;

(iii) my commercial duties will not involve liaison or contact with the Government
departments.

Signature of the applicant

Address:

403
 FORM 26
(Statements | to 4)
STATEMENTS FOR MONITORING AND REPORTING SYSTEM
[See Decision below Rule 94]
Statement No.1

Monthly statement showing particulars of Government servants who became due for
retirement in the next eight months.

(To be submitted by the Head of office to the next higher officer)

Statement for the month Of .......................---.------------- 19
Name of the 07106 .........................------------------- 020 - nonce
de 2. 3. 4.
S. No. Name of the Government Designation Date of
servant due for retirement

retirement

5. 6.

Whether action to complete pension Present stage of the
papers was initiated two years case para (3) of GRD 3
in advance of retirement [of Rule below rule 5.17

5.3 and Rule 5.4 of the R.C.S.
(pension) Rules 1996]

404
 STATEMENTS FOR MONITORING AND REPORTING SYSTEM
[See Decision (3) below Rule 94)
Statement No.2

Monthly statement showing particulars of Government servants who became due for
retirement in the previous calendar month and the date of authorisation of final pension.

(To be submitted by the Head of office to the next higher officer)

Statement for the month Of .........................-.------------- 19
Name of the office ..........................----------०---०--- [1806 ........................------------
ie 2. 3. 4.
S. No. Name of the Government Designation Date of
servant who retired in the retirement

preceding month

5. 6.
Number and date of final If final P.P.O. not issued by
pension payment order, if issued the date of retirement, the

date on which provisional
pension and gratuity
authorised by the Head of
Office

1: 8.

In case gratuity was not authorised or a Remark
portion of it was with held and the
amount subsequently sanctioned

405
 Part Il

1 2. 3

5. Total number of Government Total number of Government

No. servants who retired during servants in whose case the
the preceding month final PPO and final Order

for gratuity issued before
the date of retirement of
Government servants

4 5
Total number of Government Total number of cases
servants in whose case final where provisional pension
PPO, etc., has not been issued and gratuity was not authorised
but provisional pension and immediately on retirement and
gratuity authorised by the reasons therefor [Col. 2 minus
Head of office to be paid in (Col.3 + Col. 4)]

the month following the month
of retirement of Government
servants.

NOTE :- Part Il of the Statement is to be submitted by the next higher officer to the
Head of the Department.

406
 STATEMENTS FOR MONITORING AND REPORTING SYSTEM
[See Decision (3) below Rule 94]
Statement No.3
Quarterly Statement showing particulars of Government servants where
presumptions have been made in favour of retiring Government servants because of

incomplete/improper maintenance of service records

(To be submitted to the Head of Department one Quarter in arrear, i.e. Statement of
Quarter ending 318t March to be submitted in July of the Year)

Name of the Office .......................-.-------------- 71806 ...........................-.-.--------

Statement for the Quarter ending
*31st March/30th June/30th September/31st December

1. 2. 3. 4.
S. No. Name of the retiring Designation Date of
Government servant retirement
5 6 7
Date on which The nature of Monetary effect of presumption
final P.P.O. presumption i.e. the amount by which
issued made pension/gratuity of the Govt.

servant has increased because
of presumption

8. 9.
Officer(s) responsible for Action taken against
Improper maintenance of The officer responsible
Record for lapse
* Delete whichever is not applicable

407
 STATEMENTS FOR MONITORING AND REPORTING SYSTEM

[See Decision (3) below Rule 94]

Statement No. 4

Half-yearly Statement showing particulars of Government servants in whose
case pension was not determined within six months of retirement

(To be submitted by the Head of the Department to the Secretary of the Department)

Statement for the half-year ending 30th June/31°

Name of the Department

December

1. 2.

3. 4.

S. No. Name of the retiring

Government servant

Date of
retirement

Designation

Date on which
provisional pension
authorised

Date on which
provisional pension
made final

Reason for non-determination
of final pension within six
months of retirement

408
 FORM 27
(See Rule 79)

Form of Application to Directorate of
Estates/P.W.D. for issue of No Demand

Certificate in respect of Government

accommodation.
To
The Director of Estates,
Rajasthan, Jaipur/
Executive Engineer,
Public Works Department,
(Through Head of Office)
Sir,

- WOFKING 85 .....................-.-----------------०---०--- in the
have been in occupation of Government
accommodation and have also taken furniture from P.W.D. stores on rent as under:

House No. :
Location :
Place

Since when occupied :

af ON =

Details of furniture taken on rent

Please issue a no demand certificate in respect of the period preceding eight months
of my retirement i.e..............

Yours faithfully,

Signature
(Name of the Government
Servanl) ? cence

Designation : .................-.-

409
 FORM 27A
(See Rule 79 (3))
in duplicate

Form of Certificate where no Government
accommodation has been occupied by the

Government servant.

To

है ॥। 5 मा teeter crt

(Head of Office)

Subject :- Certificate of non occupation of Government accommodation.
Sir,

| come WOKING 2 मा in
your office, hereby certify that | am not in occupation of any Government accommodation
and/or have not taken any articles like furniture etc. from P.W.D. Stores on rent.

| further declare and undertake to inform you for recovery of rent in case any

Government accommodation is occupied by me after this date.

Yours faithfully,

Signature

Name and Designation of

the Government servant.

410
 FORM 28
(See Rule 94 - Procedure)
Form of Application to Treasury Officer
for issue of No Dues Certificate in respect

of Long Term Advances.

To
The Treasury Officer,
(Through : head of office)
Subject : Issue of No Dues Certificate on L.T.A.
Sir,

|.... working as in the
office of the was granted following Long Term Advances,
namely House Building Advance, House Repairs Advance and Conveyance Advance, in the
entire service period, according to details given against each :-

Kind of Name of Bill No. & Amount L.T.A. Amount

Advance Treasury date/ sanctioned AIC No. paid so
date of far.
encashment

ds 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

Outstanding amount, Amount set apart for

cifany recovery from gratuity

Principal Interest Total

7. 8. 9. 10.

A. HOUSE BUILDING ADVANCE
(i) First Advance

(ii) Second Advance

B. HOUSE REPAIRS ADVANCE
(i) First Advance
(ii) Second Advance
(iii) Third Advance

411
 C. CONVEYANCE ADVANCE
(i) First Advance
(ii) Second Advance
(iii) Third Advance

| certify that | have not been granted any other Long Term advance during my entire
service period. Please issue no dues certificate/outstanding amount in respect of the above
advances.

Yours faithfully

Signature :
Name & Designation of
Government servant
Dated the ..................-

Forwarded to the Treasury Officer, ........................-.-------------------०-------- for issue of a
‘no dues certificate’ in respect of the above advances. Based on the Service Book, Office
copies of Pay Bills, Last Pay Certificate if any issued by the office from where the applicant
had come on transfer to this office, and other available records in the office, he has not
taken any other Long Term Advance.

Signature :
Head of Office

412
 FORM 28 A
(See Rule 94 - PROCEDURE)
Form of certificate by the Government servant
where no Long Term Advance has been taken by him.

(in duplicate)
To

(Head of Office)

Subject:- Certificate of not taking any Long Term Advance. ————————_
Sir,
| कि मम मम eee WOKING SS secnenmmeemnemnee (Designation)
in your office, hereby certify that | have not taken any kind of Long Terms Advance from the

Government, namely, House Building Advance, House Repairs Advance, Conveyance
Advance etc. during my entire service period.

Yours faithfully

Signature :
(Name of the Government
servant)

Dated the : Designation

NG मा अमन Dated the

It is certified that the above declaration has been checked and found correct on the
basis of Service Book office copies of pay bills of this office, last pay certificate, if any,
issued by the office from where he has come on transfer to this office, and other available
records in this office.

Signature :
Head of Office
Designation :
Seal

413
 FORM 29
(See Rule 107 (2) (A))
Form of Intimation regarding death of a
pensioner where payment of family pension

has been authorised to the widow/widower

From :
The Treasury Officer/Branch Manager
seeeaeeeeneeeeeeeeseeeeeateates 11111 Bank
(Pension Disbursing Authority)
To,
The Director,
Pension and Pensioner’s Welfare Department,
Rajasthan, Jaipur.
Dated the: ..................- 19 ...........-
Subject:- Intimation regarding death of pensioner where payment of Family
Pension has been authorised to widow/widower.
Sir,

| am to inform you that Shri/Smt. ...............--------------०-०----- holder of P.P.O. No. ...........
who was drawing his/her pension from this Treasury/Sub-treasury/Bank died on ..................-

2. The first payment of family pension @ Rs. ........... (Rupees
per month has been made to ........................-.----- for the period from ...
1.9४. NO. .........................- dated ............. and included in the pension
payment schedule for ..........................-.--- T Diccwnmmvcnene Before making the said payment, the

death certificate, the application form and other documents prescribed therein have been
obtained from the claimant and accepted after necessary scrutiny. | have also personally
satisfied myself about the identity and title of the claimant.

Yours faithfully,

Treasury Officer/Branch Manager

Note:- In case of Nationalised Bank, a copy shall be sent by the Branch Manager to the
concerned Treasury Officer.

414
 To,

Sir,

FORM No.30
(See Rule 104)
Form of application by a pensioner for
endorsement of particulars of spouse for

post retiral marriage.
(To be filled in triplicate and submitted to Head of Office which processed

pension papers initially)

The Director,
Pension and Pensioner’s Welfare Department,
Rajasthan, Jaipur.

| am to state that | have married/remarried ON ...........................------ | give below the

requisite particulars, of my spouse for necessary endorsement on my P.P.O.

| also enclose (i) 3 copies of pass port size joint photograph with my spouse duly

attested (ii) an attested copy of marriage certificate from Registrar/Gram Panchayat/ District
Magistrate for necessary action.

a पु पे

Enel:

Name of the Pensioner (as recorded in PPO)

Full present Address.

Date of retirement.

P.P.O. No. & Date

Name of Pension Disbursing Authority

(a) Details of family as given in the application for the grant of pension.
(b) Date of death/divorce of the previous spouse

(Attested copies of death certificate/divorce decree to be enclosed).

Particulars of spouse from post-retiral marriage

(I) Name
(Il) Date of marriage with the pensioner (please attach attested copy of marriage
certificate)

(III) | Joint photograph of the pensioner and the spouse referred to at item (a)
above duly attested.

3 copies of Joint
photographs,
marriage certificate

415
 | certify that the particulars furnished above are correct.

Signature of Pensioner
Attested by
(with name in block letters

with address)

1; Signature Place :
Name : Date :
Address :
2. Signature
Name
Address :
Note :- Attestation should be done by two Gazetted Government servant or by two

respectable persons in the town/village in which the applicant resides.

416
 Form 31
[See rule 8 and 96 (4)]
Form of Tentative Last Pay Certificate

(To be attached with form 7 or 18)

1. Tentative/Final Last Pay Certificate of Shri/Smt. .............-------
Soe Eee Riser मम मम ETE who has retired/is to retire on

2. He has been/will be paid ७0 10..........................- at the following rates :—
Substantive 09५.......................-------- P.M.
Officiating pay. P.M.

1०10-10 21100 मा P.M.
Allowances:
Dearness /॥0५४४॥०७.......................- P.M.

House Rent Allowance.........

City Compensatory Allowance P.M.
Any other /#8॥0५४४॥1०७.......................- P.M.
Total :
3. He has handed over/will hand over the charge ०+......................---- Office in the

forenoon/afternoon of.

4. The following amount is to be recovered from the Pension/DCRG:-

Details of Amount Amount Balance Authority Head of
Recovery outstanding Recovered Principal/ (basis) of credit
Interest Recovery

|. Dues of Government
accommodation

Il. Long Term Advances

(i) House Building
Advance |

(ii) House Repairs
Advance |

(iii) Conveyance
Advance I

417
 Any Other Advance
(give details)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

Other recoveries

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

418

Signature of D.D.O.
Office/Department
 FORM NO.32
(Rule 45 (note 3))
Form of Certificate for counting officiating pay.
Certified that the officiating appointment of Shri/SMt./KU. ........................--------------------

ON TE POS eesciccssmservsrarewonnenvine was not in the leave vacancy or to hold the charge of
higher post in officiating capacity in addition to his own duties.

5ांध्वा४0५1॥6..................------
02069161910ा....................-
(Appointing Authority)

419
 10.

11.

FORM NO. 33
FORM FOR SANCTIONING PROVISIONAL
PENSION/FAMILY PENSION AND
RETIREMENT/DEATH GRATUITY
(See Rule 5.9 and 5.22)

Name of the Government servant

Father’s Name (and also husband’s Photograph
name in the case of a female attested
Government servant) by

Head of Office
Date of birth (by Christian era)

Permanent residential address

Present or last appointment
including name of establishment:

(i) Substantive
(ii) Officiating, if any.
Date of beginning of service

Date of ending of service/Date
of Death (For Family Pension)

Total qualifying service which
counts for pension.

Emoluments reckoning for Pension and

Gratuity.
PART -।

Amount of Pension:

Emoluments last Completed six monthly

drawn period of qualifying

x Service = ४
3 66 Pension Amount

Amount of Retirement gratuity:

Emoluments Completed six monthly

last drawn period of qualifying Amount of

service _ retirement
4 ~ gratuity
OR

16’ times of emoluments at the time of
retirement, whichever is less (This amount
should not more than Rs. 2.50 lacs).

420
 12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

Provisional Pension = 100% of amount arrived at item No.10.

Provisional Gratuity = Rs.... (75% of the amount arrived at
item No.11 if no amount of
HBA has been set apart for
recovery out of gratuity
otherwise not exceeding 20%)

(a) Details of amount
recoverable from  २5...................---------
gratuity under sub-
rule (1) of Rule 5.8

(b) Net amount payable of = २३५.........................---
provisional Gratuity
(item No.13-item No.14 (a).

PART - Il

Amount of Family Pension

(i) Emoluments at the time X...percent -<1२५....................-
of death (As per slab)

(ii) Minimum Family pension = २३....................-
in the slab

(iii) Maximum family pension = २३५....................-
in the slab Amount of
family pension determined
based on (i), (ii) and (iii) © RS vecwsicnornescawens

Amount of family pension at enhanced
rates (if service rendered is 7 years or
more)

(a) (i) Fifty percent of emoluments © RS wcenennensesiers
(ii) Double the amount of pension
determined at item No.15 above © RSwecenenensesiers

Amount of family pension at
enhanced rate (amount of (i)

or (ii) whichever is less) = २४..................---
(b) where workmen’s Compensation Act
is applicable
(i) Fifty percent of emoluments ® Riese:
(ii) One and half time the amount of
pension determined at item No.15 @ Revues
above

Amount of Family pension at
enhanced rate (amount at (i) or (ii)
whichever is less) © RS vscsssnomermeesaen

Note:- The amount under (a) or (b) shall not exceed Rs.2500/-p.m.

421
 17. Amount of Death Gratuity
Length of qualifying service:
Less than one year emoluments X 2 = २५.........................-

One year or more but less
than five years emoluments X 6 = २३५........................--

Five years or more but less than

twenty years
Completed six
Twenty years or more emoluments X monthly period
of service
2
= RStesunnerneserss:
Note: This amount should not exceeding 33 times of emoluments and Rs.2.50 lacs.
18. Provisional Family Pension = 100% of amount determining at
item No.15/16 as the case may
be.
19. Provisional Death Gratuity = 75% of amount determined at
item No.17.
20. Details of amount recoverable

(a) Out of Gratuity under sub-rule (4) = RS... eee eee
of Rule 5.21

(b) Net amount payable of provisional = २३५........................--
Death Gratuity (item No.19-item No.20 (a)

422
 PART Ill

In exercise of powers conferred under Rule ........................- of R.C.S. (Pension)
Rules the undersigned, having satisfied that the pension case has been sent/not sent to the
Director, Pension Department and the same has not been finalised so far hereby sanction
the provisional pension/family pension wW.@.f. ...................------- as above in Part I/Il and
Provisional Retirement/Death Gratuity to Shri/SMt/Ku. ..............-.-- eee cece eeeeeeeeeeeees

Signature Designation of the

Head of Office with Rubber Stamp

Copy forwarded to the-
Director, Pension Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur.
Concerned Head of Department.

Sh./Smt./Ku. ....

1
2
3
4.
5
6
7

Signature and Seal of Head of
Office

423
 