Chunk 1:
MOST IMMEDIATE No.11019/06/2001 -AIS-IIl Government of India Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Department of Personnel and Training TLC LL) New Delhi, the 5" December, 2007 To Chief Secretaries of all States and UTs Subject:- Delegation of powers to the Stale Governments and Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India in cases of members of All India Services proceeding abroad on ex-India leave (excluding study leave) Sir/Madam This Department has issued a number of instructions regulating cases of members of All India Services proceeding abroad on ex-India leave (excluding study leave), which are as under: A. No.9/26/7!-AIS-III dated 23" September, 1972 regulating ex-India leave. B. No.11019/13/93-AIS-III dated 14" January, 1994 regulating leave in conjunction with duty abroad. C. No.1 1020/15/1997-AIS-III dated 14" December, 1998 regulating ex- India extraordinary leave on personal grounds. D. No.11019/6/2001-AIS-III dated 7" March, 2003, 4" August, 2003 and 10 March, 2004 delegating some of the powers of the Central Government to the State Governments. Copics of all these instructions are available in this Department’s Website (www.persmin.nic.in). 2. These

Chunk 2:
instructions were re-examined in this Department and it has been decided to modify the existing provisions for further delegation of powers, subject to the general conditions mentioned in para 3 of this “ istries/Departments of the , 7 _letter, to the State Governments and Mi as under: Government of India for grant of ex-India leave, sons (i) Private visits abroad for purely personal rea ee ments of the Current Status: - State Governments and Ministries/ Sees iol private Government of India have been delegated the power neoeaiCr a A nut visits abroad, which are purely personal, without any ite or leave on linked to official visit, whether casual leave, earned eav ve vise a medical certificate. This delegation does not include priva extra ordinary leave and half-pay leave (Reference C & D). Further Delegation: - It has now been decided that approval ore respective Cadre Controlling Authorities of the All India Services ak longer be required in the case of private visits abroad, which ee : personal without any sponsorship and not linked to any official visit, o leave due and admissible, whether casual leave, earned leave, half-pay leave, leave on medical grounds and extra ordinary leave. State Governments and Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India may sanction such leave, duc and admissible, to a member of the Service as per rules. (ii) Visits abroad in conjunction of an official visit / tour abroad Current Status: - The State Governments and Ministries/Departments of ‘the Government of India have been delegated the power to accord permission to travel abroad on leave due and admissible in conjunction with an official visittour abroad (including training) subject to the exigencies of public service, not exceeding 50% of the actual period of duty abroad (excluding transit time and enforced halt) or a fortnight, whichever

Chunk 3:
Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India may sanction such leave, duc and admissible, to a member of the Service as per rules. (ii) Visits abroad in conjunction of an official visit / tour abroad Current Status: - The State Governments and Ministries/Departments of ‘the Government of India have been delegated the power to accord permission to travel abroad on leave due and admissible in conjunction with an official visittour abroad (including training) subject to the exigencies of public service, not exceeding 50% of the actual period of duty abroad (excluding transit time and enforced halt) or a fortnight, whichever is less, for personal reasons provided that the total period abroad (including travel time) does not exceed three wecks. Grant of leave in excess of this limit can be approved only in consultation with the Department of Personnel and Training (Services Division). (Reference B & D) Further Delegation: - It has been decided to raise the maximum period of ex-India leave in conjunction with official duty to 3 weeks while adhering to the limit of 50% of the period of official duty abroad. However, in the case of official visits of duration less than 8 days, the limit of 50% may be relaxed and ex-India leave upto a maximum of 4 days may be granted. The power to grant such leave is delegated to the Ry ore OF - from a foreign governm 3 State Governments and Ministries/Departments of the Government of India subject to the condition that further leave shall not be permitted above such limits under any circumstances and no reference shail be made to the Department of Personnel and Training in this regard. (iii) Visits abroad on direct invitation from foreign organizations for participation in events on the basis of the experience in a particular subject gained by a member of the Service in his/her personal capacity. Current Status: - Cadre clearance of the Central Government is required in all cases where the invitation is direct to the officer and the State Government is not bearing the expenditure irrespective of the duration of visit and all cases

Chunk 4:
shall not be permitted above such limits under any circumstances and no reference shail be made to the Department of Personnel and Training in this regard. (iii) Visits abroad on direct invitation from foreign organizations for participation in events on the basis of the experience in a particular subject gained by a member of the Service in his/her personal capacity. Current Status: - Cadre clearance of the Central Government is required in all cases where the invitation is direct to the officer and the State Government is not bearing the expenditure irrespective of the duration of visit and all cases of more than three weeks duration (Reference D). Further Delegation: - It has been decided that State Governments and Ministries/Departments of the Government of India be delegated the for such private visits in which the . power to allow permission government js not bearing any expenditure subject to the condition that the total period of ex-India leave does not exceed three weeks. As per the conditions prescribed in the Department of Expenditure’s O.M.F.No.19036/ 1/2000-E-IV dated 21" March, 2000, the officer shall be treated as on personal visit and he/she will be required to take leave due and admissible. This is further subject to the condition that generally no Government of India officer will accept free passage oF hospitability ent/agency and, if it is necessary, approval of the f Secretaries or of the Prime Minister should be Screening Committee 0 ensured to be taken before accepting such invitations. Similar provisions should be adopted by the State Governments. This delegation is also subject to the following conditions: (a) The ‘authority granting permission should take into consideration, inter-alia, the sources of financing of the foreign travel, the desirability of accepting any foreign hospitality, whether the member of the Service has utilized his official position for the purpose of meeting the travel expenses, accommodation abroad, etc, and whether the member of the Service is clear from vigilance angle; (b) If the visit is to a country with which India does not have friendly relations, the prior approval of the Government of India should be

Chunk 5:
be adopted by the State Governments. This delegation is also subject to the following conditions: (a) The ‘authority granting permission should take into consideration, inter-alia, the sources of financing of the foreign travel, the desirability of accepting any foreign hospitality, whether the member of the Service has utilized his official position for the purpose of meeting the travel expenses, accommodation abroad, etc, and whether the member of the Service is clear from vigilance angle; (b) If the visit is to a country with which India does not have friendly relations, the prior approval of the Government of India should be obtained; " (c) The officer shall take leave, due and admissible; (d)The visit on personal invitation shall be subject to the provisions of SR 12. ons

Chunk 6:
of All India (e) Participation shall be subject to the provisi 44 Service (Conduct) Rules, 1968 especially rules 6, 7, 9 an The State Governments and Mists Departments of the Government of India shall keep in mind some as dia aspects while exercising these delegated powers while granting onder: leave to the members of the All India Service working under them, as u ; 3. General

Chunk 7:
conditions: a) The member of the Service will take FCRA clearance from the Ministry of Home Affairs and other required clearances from the Department of Economic Affairs/Ministry of External Affairs, wherever required. b) The delegation shall not apply to any travel abroad in conjunction with leave granted under the provisions of the Al! India (Study Leave) Regulations, 1960, where the specific clearance of the Central Government is invariably required. c) In cases where a member of the Service proceeds for a visit abroad without obtaining necessary cadre clearance, the period of his absence shall be treated as ‘dies non’ apart from other consequences under the service rules. d) The provisions of Rule 7(1) and (2) of the All India Service (Leave) Rules, 1955 should be complied with. Rule 7(1) provides that no member of the Service shall be granted leave of any kind for a continuous period exceeding 5 years. Rule 7(2) provides that a member of the Service shall be deemed to have resigned from the service if he is absent without authorization for a period exceeding one year or remains absent from duty for a continuous period exceeding 5 years, with or without leave. If the visit abroad requires the sanction of the Central Government, proposal should be forwarded to the Central Government well in time, ie., at least before a fortnight from the date of ~ Cc PE eed EE 5 commencement of the visit i ae the visit in a self-contained ishi e relevant details in the prescribed format helen f) Approval of ws et te bere Government with respect to travel abroad the approval of th India Services, wherever required shall mean Department 0 F e concerned Cadre Controlling Authority, i.¢., the hetecintatea 0 Personnel and Training for the Indian Tydlen POR ive Service, the

Chunk 8:
requires the sanction of the Central Government, proposal should be forwarded to the Central Government well in time, ie., at least before a fortnight from the date of ~ Cc PE eed EE 5 commencement of the visit i ae the visit in a self-contained ishi e relevant details in the prescribed format helen f) Approval of ws et te bere Government with respect to travel abroad the approval of th India Services, wherever required shall mean Department 0 F e concerned Cadre Controlling Authority, i.¢., the hetecintatea 0 Personnel and Training for the Indian Tydlen POR ive Service, the Ministry of Home Affairs for the olice Service and the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the Indian Forest Service. ‘ While granting leave to a member of the Service, the State eeu and Ministries/Departments of the Government of India 8 ould scrupulously follow the Government of India instruction issued vide this Department’s letter no.11019/62/2005-AIS-II dated 4" July, 2007 which envisages that no member of the All India Service shall be allowed to undertake any private employment after taking leave from the State Government or from a Central Ministry/Department. -5 ASI the relevant instructions issued earlier in this regard stand modified/deleted. 6. The

Chunk 9:
above delegation of powers is not applicable in cases of official visits abroad for attending foreign training/tours/study  tours/seminars/workshops, etc., in which the member of the Service is nominated by the Central/State Governments, which are dealt by the EO Division of this Department.  7.

