Chunk 1:
10.

Chunk 2:
‘THE INDIAN ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE (REGULATION OF SENIORITY) RULES, 1987  1. Short

Chunk 3:
title and commencement-  (1) These rules may be called the Indian Administrative Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1987.

Chunk 4:
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the official gazette.  2. Definitions

Chunk 5:
- In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) ‘Cadre’ means the Indian Administrative Service Cadre constituted in accordance with rule 3 of the Cadre Rules; (b) ‘Cadre Rules’ means the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; 2(c) [Deleted] (d) ‘Commission’ means the Union Public Service Commission; (e) ‘competitive examination’ means the examination referred to in rule 7 of the Recruitment Rules; (f) ‘direct recruit officer’ means an officer appointed to the Service through a competitive examination in accordance with rule 7 of the Recruitment Rules; (g) ‘gradation list’ means the gradation list prepared under rule 5 of these rules; (h) ‘officer’ means a member of the Service; (i) ‘officer appointed by selection’ means an officer appointed to the Service in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Administrative Service (Appointment by Selection) Regulations, 1956; (j) ‘promotee officer’ means an officer appointed to the Service in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Administrative Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations, 1955; (k) ‘Recruitment Rules’ means the Indian Administrative Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1954; (I) ‘Select List’ means the Select List prepared in accordance with the Indian Administrative Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations, 1955; 3(m) [Deleted] (n) ‘Service’ means the Indian Administrative Service; (0) ‘State Cadre’ and “Joint Cadre’ have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Cadre rules; 4(p) [Deleted] (q) ‘State Government concerned’, in relation to a Joint cadre, means the Joint Cadre Authority. 3. Assignment

Chunk 6:
of year of allotment:- (1) Every officer shall be assigned a year of allotment in accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained in these rules. (2) The year of allotment of an officer in Service at the commencement of these rules shall be the same as has been assigned to him or may be assigned to him by the Central Government in ' The initial Rules viz. IAS (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1954 were repealed and replaced vide Notification No. 14014/76/84- AIS(l) dated 6.11.

Chunk 7:
1987 - GSR No. 896(E) dated 6.11.

Chunk 8:
1987.

Chunk 9:
? Deleted vide Notification Np.14014/14/2000-AIS(|) dated 30.8.

Chunk 10:
2005 — GSR Mp.549(E) dated 30.8.

Chunk 11:
2005 5 Ibid Note 2 * Ibid Note 2 294 accordance with the orders and instructions in force immediately before the commencement of these rules. (3) The year of allotment of an officer appointed to the Service after the commencement of these rules shall be as follows:- (i) the year of allotment of a direct recruit officer shall be the year following the year in which the competitive examination was held: Provided that if a direct recruit officer is permitted to join probationary training under rule 5(1) of the IAS (Probation) Rules, 1954, with direct recruit officers of a subsequent year of allotment, then he shall be assigned that subsequent year as the year of allotment. S(ii) The year of allotment of a promotee officer shall be determined with reference to the year for which the meeting of the Committee to make selection, to prepare the select list on the basis of which he was appointed to the Service, was held and with regard to the continuous service rendered by him in the State Civil Service not below the rank of a Deputy Collector or equivalent, up to the 31° day of December of the year immediately before the year for which meeting of the Committee to make selection was held to prepare the select list on the basis of which he was appointed to the Service, in the following manner:- a. for the service rendered by him upto twenty one years, he shall be given a weightage of one year for every completed three years of service, subject to a minimum of four years; b. he shall also be given a weightage of one year for every completed two years of service beyond the period of twenty one years, referred to in sub-clause (a), subject to a maximum of

Chunk 12:
for which meeting of the Committee to make selection was held to prepare the select list on the basis of which he was appointed to the Service, in the following manner:- a. for the service rendered by him upto twenty one years, he shall be given a weightage of one year for every completed three years of service, subject to a minimum of four years; b. he shall also be given a weightage of one year for every completed two years of service beyond the period of twenty one years, referred to in sub-clause (a), subject to a maximum of three years. Explanation- For the purpose of calculation of the weightage under this clause, the fractions, if any, are to be ignored: Provided that he shall not be assigned a year of allotment earlier than the year of allotment assigned to an officer senior to him in that select list or appointed to the service on the basis of an earlier select list: S(iii) the year of allotment of an officer appointed by selection shall be determined with reference to the year for which the meeting of the Committee to make the selection to prepare the select list, on the basis of which he was appointed to the Service, was held and with regard to the continuous service rendered by him in a post equivalent to the post of Deputy Collector or a higher post, up to the 31*' December of the year immediately before the year for which the meeting of the Committee to make the selection was held to prepare the select list on the basis of which he was appointed to the service, in the following manner:- (a) for the service rendered by him up to twenty one years, he shall be given a weightage of one year for every completed three years of service, subject to a minimum of four years; (b) he shall also be given a weightage of one year for every completed two years of service beyond the period of twenty one years, referred to in sub-clause (a), subject to a maximum of

Chunk 13:
meeting of the Committee to make the selection was held to prepare the select list on the basis of which he was appointed to the service, in the following manner:- (a) for the service rendered by him up to twenty one years, he shall be given a weightage of one year for every completed three years of service, subject to a minimum of four years; (b) he shall also be given a weightage of one year for every completed two years of service beyond the period of twenty one years, referred to in sub-clause (a), subject to a maximum of three years. Explanation- For the purpose of calculation of the weightage under this clause, the fractions, if any, shall be ignored: Provided that he shall not be assigned a year of allotment earlier than the year of allotment assigned to an officer senior to him in that select list or appointed to the Service on the basis of an earlier select list: 5 Substituted vide Notification No. 14015/54/96-AIS(I)-A dated 31.12.

Chunk 14:
1997 — GSR No. 736(E) dated 31.12.

Chunk 15:
1997.

Chunk 16:
° Amended vide Notification No. 14014/14/2000-AIS(1) dated 30.8.

Chunk 17:
2005 — GSR No. 549(E) dated 30.8.

Chunk 18:
2005 295 Provided further that he shall not be allotted a year earlier than the year of allotment assigned to an officer already appointed to the service in accordance with sub-rule (1) of rule 8 of the recruitment rules, whose length of Class | continuous service in the State Civil Service is equal to or more than the length of Class | continuous service of the former in connection with the affairs of the State. Explanation-The length of the relevant Class | continuous service in either case shall be with reference to the 31° day of December of the year immediately before the year for which the meeting of the Committee to make selection was held to prepare the select list on the basis of which appointments were made in the respective cases. 4. Inter

Chunk 19:
-se seniority of the officers who are assigned the same year of allotment:-The inter-se seniority of the officers appointed to the Service shall be in the following order and in each category the inter-se seniority shall be determined in the following manner:- i. direct recruit officers shall be ranked inter-se in the order of merit as determined in accordance with rule 10 of the Indian Administrative Service (Probation) Rules, 1954; ii Promotee officers shall be ranked inter-se in the order in which their names are arranged by the Commission for the purpose of appointment to the Service by promotion; ’ iii officers appointed by selection shall be ranked inter-se in the order in which their names are arranged by the Commission for the purpose of appointment to the Service by selection. [Omitted] 5. Gradation

Chunk 20:
List:-There shall be prepared every year for each State Cadre and Joint Cadre a gradation list consisting of the names of all officers borne on that cadre arranged in order of seniority.  6. Fixation

Chunk 21:
of seniority of officers transferred to another cadre.- (1) If a direct recruit officer is transferred from one cadre to another in public interest, his year of allotment shall remain unchanged and his inter-se position among the direct recruits having the same year of allotment in the cadre to which he is transferred shall remain the same as determined in accordance with Rule 10 of the Indian Administrative Service (Probation) Rule, 1954.

Chunk 22:
(2) If a promotee officer or officer appointed by selection is transferred from one cadre to another in public interest, his year of allotment shall remain unchanged and he shall be ranked inter-se with promotee officers or officers appointed by selection, as the case may be, having the same year of allotment in the cadre to which he is transferred with reference to the date on the basis of which he was assigned the year of allotment under these rules. (3) If an officer is transferred from one cadre to another at his request he shall be assigned a position in the gradation list of the cadre to which he is transferred below all the officers of his category borne on that cadre who have the same year of allotment: Provided that in the case of a direct recruit officer transferred from one cadre to another at his request, his seniority in the list prepared under Rule 10 of the Indian Administrative Service (Probation) Rules, 1954 shall remain unaffected for the purposes of the said list. 7. Seniority

Chunk 23:
of officers appointed under sub-rule (3) of rule 4 of the Indian Administrative Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1954:- Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the provisions of these rules, the seniority of officers appointed to the Service in accordance with T Amended vide Notification No. 14014/14/2000-AIS(!) dated 30.8.

Chunk 24:
2005-GSRNo. 549(E) dated 30.8.

Chunk 25:
2005. 8

Chunk 26:
Proviso omitted vide Notification No. 14014/14/2000-AIS(I) dated 30.8.

Chunk 27:
2005 - GSR No. 549(E) dated 30.8.

Chunk 28:
2005 296 the provisions of sub-rule (3) of Rule 4 of the Indian Administrative Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1954 shall be determined in accordance with such principles as the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Governments and the Commission, from time to time, determine. 8. Interpretation

Chunk 29:
:- If any question arises as to the interpretation of these rules, it shall be referred to the Central Government for decision.  9. Repeal

