Chunk 1:
RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (ABOVE 10 HECTARES) AND POLICY FOR RESIDENTIAL, GROUP HOUSING AND OTHER SCHEMES IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR, 2010 (UP TO 10 HECTARES) rooting Sustainable Denys, 7) ta Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan June, 2010 Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (ABOVE 10 HECTARES) RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan Government of Rajasthan DEPARTMENT OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT, HOUSING & LOCAL SELF GOVERNMENT No. F.3 (77)UDD/3/20102 JAIPUR, Dated: 28/06/2010 NOTIFICATION Subject: Rajasthan Township Policy, 2010 (Above 10 Hectares of Land) In supersession of the Department notification F.10(1)UDD/3/2002 dated 01.01.

Chunk 2:
02, 15.01.

Chunk 3:
.02,29.03.

Chunk 4:
07 and order dated 06.07.

Chunk 5:
02 and 27.12.

Chunk 6:
04 and any other orders / notifications issued in this regard, the State Government in order to promote planned development of new townships in the State and to encourage Private Sector Investment / Foreign Direct Investment (FDJ) in housing and real estate sector, following Rajasthan Township Policy (Above 10 Hectares of Land), 2010, is hereby issued under section 337 of the Rajasthan Municipal Act, 2009, Section 90 of the Jaipur Development Authority Act, 1982, section 49 of the Jodhpur Development Authority Act, 2009;, section 60 of the Rajasthan Housing Board Act, 1970 and Rule 31 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement (Disposal of urban lands) Rules, 1974 :- 1.0

Chunk 7:
INTRODUCTION  1.01

Chunk 8:
In order to promote planned / integrated development of various towns by providing the basic infrastructure facilities and to safeguard the interest of the public at large by ensuring availability of residential plots/houses at affordable prices, the State Government decided to review the existing Township Policy, 2002 and other policies and programmes pertaining to urban areas of Rajasthan. Following new initiatives have already been taken during the last one year:- (i) Rajasthan Municipal Act, 2009 (new enactment). (ii) Affordable Housing Policy, 2009 with focus on EWS/LIG H through Public Private Partnership. (PPP) (iii) New Building Regulations, 2010 for Jaipur (in place of Building Regulations of 2000). (iv) Model Building Regulations for all towns of Rajasthan. (v) Detailed Guidelines for Sub-division and reconstitution of plots in urban areas. (vi) Slum Development Policy through Public Private Partnership (PPP) (vii) Draft Master Plan for Jaipur and Other Towns of Rajasthan. (viii) Policy for Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes in the Private Sector, 2010.

Chunk 9:
(ix) Rajasthan Town and Country Planning & Development Bill, 2010 (draft). (x) Policy for Transferable Development Rights (TDR) (draft). RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 1.02

Chunk 10:
While preparing the new Township Policy, the Township Policies of various other States like Maharashtra, Gujarat, Punjab and Haryana were studied. A workshop and series of discussions were held under the aegis of Institute of Town Planners, India (ITPI), in which the President, ITPI; Secretary General, ITPI; Chief Town Planners and senior officers of Town Planning Department of Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Haryana, Gujarat and West Bengal and developers of Rajasthan participated. Views were also sought from various urban local bodies in Rajasthan and agencies concerned with township development including the Rajasthan Builders & Promoters Association (RBPA), Township Developers Association of Rajasthan (TODAR) and Rajasthan State Real Estate Development Council (RAJREDCO). 1.03

Chunk 11:
Taking into account various views/suggestions and learning from Policies being followed by other States as well the experience gained over the past few years, it was considered appropriate to frame a new Township Policy. Hence the Policy called the Rajasthan Township Policy, 2010 has been framed. 2.0

Chunk 12:
APPLICABILITY OF THE POLICY (1) Rajasthan Township Policy (Above 10 Hectares of Land), 2010 shall come into force with immediate effect. (2) This Policy shall be applicable to the cases which are applied after the date of issue of this Policy as well as the pending cases. However pending cases in which notice under section 90-B of Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 has been issued before the issue of this Policy would be considered under the provisions of Township Policy, 2002 unless the developer exercises the option of being considered under Township Policy, 2010.

Chunk 13:
(3) The Policy will apply to the areas listed below: (a) Area under the draft / sanctioned master plan of town/region; (b) Area under the peripheral control belt of the master plan of a town/ region; (c) All areas covered under Planning and Development Authorities (Jaipur Development Authority, Jodhpur Development Authority), Urban Improvement Trusts (UIT's), Rajasthan Housing Board and Municipal Bodies in the State; (d) Any other area notified / approved by the Government The Policy has been broadly divided into two parts. PART-I For Private Lands. PART-II For Government Lands. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan PART - I (For Private Land) 2.01

Chunk 14:
TYPES OF SCHEMES WITH AREA REQUIREMENT Following types of schemes are envisaged under this Policy:- (i) (ii) (iii) Township Scheme — More than 20 hectares. Mini-Township Scheme — More than 10 hectares and upto 20 hectares. (a) Special Townships (like Educational Township, Industrial Township, 1.T.

Chunk 15:
Township etc with more than 10 hectares of land. (b) Mixed land use on land of closed /sick units in small towns with minimum area of 10 hectares in RIJCO industrial areas in small towns. (c) Affordable housing projects on land of sick or unviable units in industrial areas of RIICO or elsewhere. 3.00

Chunk 16:
REGISTRATION OF DEVELOPERS FOR TOWNSHIP / MINI- TOWNSHIPSCHEMES  3.01

Chunk 17:
3.02

Chunk 18:
3.03

Chunk 19:
3.04

Chunk 20:
3.05

Chunk 21:
Registration of Real Estate Developers with the concerned Urban Local Body shall be compulsory before they take up development of any new township or mini-township project in the State. Following non-refundable Registration fee shall be payable by the developers to the concerned local bodies - (i) Jaipur- Rs.5,00,000 (five lac rupees) (ii) Divisional headquarters towns-Rs. 2,50,000 (two lac and fifty thousand rupees) (iii) Other towns- Rs. 1,00,000 (one lac rupees) It shall be compulsory for all urban local bodies, that after receiving of application from the developers, registration certificate is issued within 30 days. A developer who is registered in Jaipur will not be required to register at other places in Rajasthan. However, he has to furnish a copy of the Registration Certificate to the concerned local body. For the purpose of registration the developer shall furnish information about his financial resources, manpower, experience, office address etc to the local body. Registration will remain valid for a period of five years. After the first registration subsequent registration can be done for a block of five years on deposition of fifty percent of the above amount for each such block. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 4.00

Chunk 22:
TECHNICALAND FINANCIAL PARAMETERS a) For Township Schemes, Technical and Financial Parameters for the real estate company are as prescribed in: Table-A Financial Minimum number of Minimum Resources technical staff Net worth Minimum employed/hired for last (Rs. in turnover (total one year on projects crores) in last 5 years) (Engineers, architects, Land Area in Hectares (Rs. in crores)/ MBAs, CAs, etc.) Above 10 to 20 Above 20 and upto 50 Above 50 and upto 100 Above 100 & upto 300 50 200 50 Above 300 250 1000 200 Note- (i) | Aconsortium of companies or a joint venture between land owner and Developer Company would also be allowed to develop mini-townships/townships. In such cases the combined technical and financial requirements of the consortium or the joint venture would be taken into account subject to the condition that the minimum 50% of the criteria mentioned above should be fulfilled by each of the partner to the consortium ( with the exception of land owner) (ii) Experience of the applicant company along with the previous / present experience of the parent company in the real estate sector shall also be considered for eligibility subject to the condition that of the one of the Directors of the applicant company shall also be the Director of the parent company. (iti) In the above table, net worth means, "Paid up Capital + Reserves less the losses (if any). 5.00

Chunk 23:
DEVELOPMENT CONTROL REGULATIONS AND PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS  5.01

Chunk 24:
Township/ Mini Township (a) The land should be contiguous in planning area. New scheme should be considered in such areas where road, water supply, power line, sewerage and various infrastructure facilities can be extended without financial burden on the concerned local body & other government agencies. (b) (i) The developer shall apply for land conversion under section 90B of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956, change in land use & approval of layout plan in the prescribed formats under the guidelines issued by the Department circular dated 25-02-2009 or as may be issued in future. (ii) Applicant should have registered title documents or registered power of attorney or registered development agreement in his favour. No unregistered document shall be accepted. al RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (iii) No person will engage himself for sale of agricultural land in the form of plots for non-agricultural purpose, for example, residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, without obtaining the required permission of concerned local body in the form of patta/lease deed/ allotment letter/sale permission/approval of layout plan, etc. (iv) No water or power connection shall be released by the concerned agency/department for such areas/scheme which have not been approved by the concerned local body. C) The layout plan of the various proposed schemes should have the planning norms of the land as detailed below: Table — B S.No. Use Percent area Remarks Residential/ | Maximum | Plotted area/ group housing / high rise Commercial | 55% to | 50% to 54% residential plotted area including minimum 5% schemes 58% area reserved for EWS / LIG group housing or 15% of total No. of Plots/dwelling units

Chunk 25:
layout plan, etc. (iv) No water or power connection shall be released by the concerned agency/department for such areas/scheme which have not been approved by the concerned local body. C) The layout plan of the various proposed schemes should have the planning norms of the land as detailed below: Table — B S.No. Use Percent area Remarks Residential/ | Maximum | Plotted area/ group housing / high rise Commercial | 55% to | 50% to 54% residential plotted area including minimum 5% schemes 58% area reserved for EWS / LIG group housing or 15% of total No. of Plots/dwelling units to be kept reserved for EWS/LIG category. (which ever is higher). 5% to 6% for commercial purposes (including informal sector shops). The commercial purpose can be petrol pump / multiplex /commercial malls / cinemas / tourism / any other general commercial. — 10 small informal shops could be provided per 100 plots. The balance (out of 6%) percentage may be used for the general commercial development The sizes of the informal shops can be 6' x 6' to 10' x 10' which shall be reserved as informal shops / kiosks/ vegetable Mandi, Seasonal / Morning Market, etc. Informal shops shall be permissible on internal roads along with a minimum provision of parking in front of the informal shops, the percentage of land area used for parking in the planning shall be considered as a percentage of the plotted area (60%). The public amenities like roads should be maintained without any reduction in the percentage for such parking requirements in the layout. Note: (i) The EWS/LIG dwelling units/plots shall be compulsory in all township/mini-township schemes. At least 50% houses to be of EWS category. In case of flats the building specifications as mentioned in the Affordable Housing Policy, 2009 shall be followed (ii) EWS/LIG plots and informal sector shops shall be allotted to nominee of developer or to the developer as in case of other plots who in turn will allot the same to eligible persons in this category. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing

Chunk 26:
reduction in the percentage for such parking requirements in the layout. Note: (i) The EWS/LIG dwelling units/plots shall be compulsory in all township/mini-township schemes. At least 50% houses to be of EWS category. In case of flats the building specifications as mentioned in the Affordable Housing Policy, 2009 shall be followed (ii) EWS/LIG plots and informal sector shops shall be allotted to nominee of developer or to the developer as in case of other plots who in turn will allot the same to eligible persons in this category. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (iii) For allotment of EWS/LIG houses/plots the income criteria as issued by State Government may be considered and the list of eligible and selected persons to be sent to concerned ULB. (iv) Size of EWS/LIGH plots - 30 to 45 sq mtrs / 46 to 75 sq mtrs. respectively and disposal of EWS & LIG plots shall be @ 25% and 60% respectively, of the residential price being charged from other allottees. (v) Size of EWS/LIGH flats to be - 325-350 sq ft and 500-550 sq ft respectively and disposal shall be @ Rs.750/- per sq ft or as decided by Govt from time to time 25 Facilities 42% to ¢ Normally, 20 -22% area would be utilized for internal road (Roads, parks 45% network. In case sector road is passing through the scheme, it & open would be considered separately. spaces, schools, hospitals, ¢ 10% area reserved for open area/park in layout plan shall be allowed to be provided at different places subject to minimum area of 3000sq.m at one place. On the remaining open area, construction of one Clubhouse will also be etc.) permitted. The plinth area of the clubhouse should be 10% of the open area plot and the permissible Built up area of the clubhouse will not exceed 15% of the same. ¢ Additionally, a minimum of 10% area for public utilities and

Chunk 27:
sector road is passing through the scheme, it & open would be considered separately. spaces, schools, hospitals, ¢ 10% area reserved for open area/park in layout plan shall be allowed to be provided at different places subject to minimum area of 3000sq.m at one place. On the remaining open area, construction of one Clubhouse will also be etc.) permitted. The plinth area of the clubhouse should be 10% of the open area plot and the permissible Built up area of the clubhouse will not exceed 15% of the same. ¢ Additionally, a minimum of 10% area for public utilities and facilities should be reserved and developed for the public purposes like kindergarten schools. Welfare Centre, Dispensary and Hospitals and other public uses. Note: (i) Inno case, the open and facility area together shall be less than 20%. (ii) Internal roads shall not be less than 9 meters where the length of road is up to 100 meters and not less than 12 mtrs where the length is more than 100 meters. In case of area used for EWS/LIGH housing the minimum road width can be 9.0

Chunk 28:
meters or lesser as provided in the Building Regulations/ Affordable Housing Policy 2009.

Chunk 29:
(iii) In the case of commercial / institutional zones the minimum road width shall be 12 meters for a length of upto 200 meters and 18 meters for the length above 200 meters (except for larger commercial complexes for which wider road has been prescribed in the Building Regulations). (iv) The saleable facility area may be allotted to the developer at his request at the prevailing reserve price for residential purposes (incase this is not available the residential reserve price of nearby area may be adopted). The developer shall develop the area for the purpose for which it has been reserved. In the event of developer not willing to take the land, the concerned ULB shall allot the same to others for the purpose for which it was reserved in the scheme. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan D) E) F) G) H) The Township / Mini-Township shall not include land under the forest, water bodies, land falling within 100m from (having the level below the HFL) the HFL of the major lakes, dams, land falling within 200m from the official boundary of Historical Monuments and places of Archaeological importance, Archaeological Monuments, Heritage Precincts, other restricted areas. The Township/Mini-township scheme shall have a minimum of 15m-approach road from any National Highway, State Highway, MDR, ODR, or any other road area network / sector roads / master plan roads. The Developer shall provide a proper bituminous road with 5.5

Chunk 30:
major lakes, dams, land falling within 200m from the official boundary of Historical Monuments and places of Archaeological importance, Archaeological Monuments, Heritage Precincts, other restricted areas. The Township/Mini-township scheme shall have a minimum of 15m-approach road from any National Highway, State Highway, MDR, ODR, or any other road area network / sector roads / master plan roads. The Developer shall provide a proper bituminous road with 5.5

Chunk 31:
meters width or surrender the road or procure the required strip of land and surrender the same to the local body along with the amount for construction of the road by the local body.  For Township / Mini Township global FAR for the entire gross area of scheme shall be 1.2.

Chunk 32:
However the individual plots can be allowed maximum FAR as per  Building Regulation but not exceeding 2.4.

Chunk 33:
Each Urban Local Body shall earmark contiguous area in one or more zones for township development within the Master Plan area or within the Municipal area (where Master Plan is not available). Having such zones would facilitate providing various kinds of external infrastructure to the township / residential schemes. Sector roads for such zones would be planned and developed by the local body so as to ensure planned development of the entire zone. Preference would be given to the developer who comes up with schemes in such zones earmarked for Township/ Residential Development inthe Master Development Plan of the area. In case land use plan has not been declared and land conversion under 90B of Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 is to be done / has been done, these areas would appropriately be incorporated in the respective master plan / sector plan/ zonal plan after change in land use as township zones. Any two or more schemes of different persons / companies may be clubbed together with the consent of all the parties and approved as a single scheme subject to minimum limit of clubbed area as 10 hectares. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 6.00

Chunk 34:
SPECIALTOWNSHIPSCHEMES (MINIMUM AREA 10 HECTARES)  6.01

Chunk 35:
The broad technical and financial parameters as mentioned at para 4 shall be applicable in such cases also.  6.02

Chunk 36:
Thebroad parameters for industrial township shall be as follows- 6.02.

Chunk 37:
1 Maximum Saleable area allowed — 65% out of which  a) Area for Major economic activities - 40% to 45%  b) Residential - 20% (including 5% of residential area for EWS/LIGH housing)  c) Commercial purpose - 3%  6.02.

Chunk 38:
2 Facilities/Services/Open/Road area — 35% out of which facilities area -10%, Open area- 5% and area under roads — 20%  6.02.

Chunk 39:
3 Minimum width of roads- 18 meters width upto length of 400 meters, 24 mts or more if length is more than 400 meters).  6.02.

Chunk 40:
4 Incase the area for roads exceeds 20% the saleable area (65%) will be reduced proportionately.  6.02.

Chunk 41:
5 All internal development to be carried out by the developer.  6.03

Chunk 42:
As regards the other special townships like tourism, IT etc. a maximum of 20% of the total area would be allowed for residential activities and supporting social infrastructure. Detailed parameters would be approved on a case-to-case basis by the State Government.  6.04

Chunk 43:
Inall the Special Townships the provisions of Building Regulations shall apply. However incase of lack of certain provisions, the same shall be decided and notified by State Government (Urban Development and Housing Department) separately.  6.05

Chunk 44:
All the development works shall be completed by the developer within a period of 5 years. However the time period can be extended by ULB by another one year on payment of penalty of 10% of the conversion charges by the developer and for another one year by the StateGovernment on payment of another 10% penalty charges. 6.06

Chunk 45:
Mixed Land use Including Housing in Industrial Areas in Small Towns (population of upto 25,000 as per 2001 Census) Large chunks of land are lying vacant in some of the industrial areas in smaller towns mainly on account of sick / closed units for more than 10 years and with no revival package/plan sanctioned for such units.. In order to fulfill housing requirements of small towns where the population is 25,000, as per 2001 census, conversion of such big chunks of land with each plot having more than 10 hectares of area may be considered for mixed land use including residential plotting . In such schemes minimum 30 % area shall be kept for internal roads, IE RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan open area, services and other facilities since some common facilities have already been provided at the level of the concerned industrial area. All internal and external development works shall be carried out by the developer / owner. Conversion charges for such mixed land use / residential schemes shall be decided by RICO. 6.07

Chunk 46:
Affordable Housing in Industrial Areas or Elsewhere (i) In case of sick industrial units in RIICO industrial area, which are lying closed for the last over 10 years and for which there is no sanctioned revival scheme the surplus land may be allowed to be used for housing for economically weaker sections (EWS) and low-income groups (LIG) under the Affordable Housing Policy, 2009. At

Chunk 47:
least 40% of the total plot area should be put to such use, out of which atleast 50% area should be kept for facilities / open area. The approval of such low-cost housing would be granted by the concerned urban local body keeping in view the provisions of the Affordable Housing Policy, 2009 and directions issued by Department of Urban Development and Housing from time to time. The balance 60% of the industrial plot area can be used for other purposes. (ii) Private sick industrial units shall also be allowed for Affordable Housing Scheme on the same terms and conditions as prescribed in Affordable Housing Policy, 2009. Note

Chunk 48:
- The parameters as at para 4 shall not be applicable in the above cases at 6.06

Chunk 49:
and 6.07

Chunk 50:
7.00

Chunk 51:
GUIDELINES FOR APPROVAL / COMPLETION OF INTERNAL DEVELOPMENT WORKS IN TOWNSHIPS AND MINI TOWNSHIPS  7.01

Chunk 52:
Submission of Detailed Project Report (DPR) In order to ensure quality development, it is necessary that the developer submits a Detailed Project Report (DPR) along with application for approval to the concerned Urban local body. Following details are required in the DPR (i) Layout plan showing details of area proposed to be utilized for plots, roads, open space for park, garden and play ground and other public facilities (like school, hospital etc.) (ii) Details showing, the development in the surrounding area (atleast 100 meters radius) along with its superimposition on sector plans (if existing). (iii) Estimate of expected population in the township and requirement of amenities as per the prevailing standard approved by Government. (iv) Details of internal development works as per specifications mentioned below (v) Details of eco friendly amenities to be provided; (vi) Plan showing HFL of major lakes, water body, if applicable) RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 7.02

Chunk 53:
Technical Specifications for Internal Development Works (a) Construction of Roads and Boundary Wall (i) Townships / Mini Townships may have a compound wall around the township with gated entry / exit. However in case of any sector roads or public roads passing through the Township / Mini Township, the movement of general public shall not be restricted. (ii) All the internal road networks including draft sector plan/ master plan roads within the township scheme are to be developed by the developer. The sector roads are to be accommodated in the scheme. If there is a exiting road area network and sector plan/ zonal plan are not prepared, then in case of township / mini township schemes there should be a central spine road having width not less than 24 mtrs. up to alength of 1000 mtrs. and 30 mtrs.,if length is more than 1000 mtrs. (iii) All the internal roads should be minimum 9 meters where the length of the road is up to 100 meters and 12 meters where road length is more than 100 meters and 18 meter where the length is more then 400 meters. (iv) However, as for as possible no row of plots should be more than 200 mtrs in length except the sector plan / zonal plan / main arterial roads having width 18 M & above. The width and carpet area of roads shall be as indicated in Table- C: Table C Paved width Berms width (carpet area) (both side) S.No. ROW 1 9 meter 5.5

Chunk 54:
more than 200 mtrs in length except the sector plan / zonal plan / main arterial roads having width 18 M & above. The width and carpet area of roads shall be as indicated in Table- C: Table C Paved width Berms width (carpet area) (both side) S.No. ROW 1 9 meter 5.5

Chunk 55:
meter 1.5

Chunk 56:
meter  2; 12 meter 5.5

Chunk 57:
meter 2.5

Chunk 58:
meter 3  ; 18 meter 5.5

Chunk 59:
meter (2 lane) 2.5

Chunk 60:
meter  4, 24 meters and 2 lane each 7.5

Chunk 61:
meters with 2.5

Chunk 62:
meter above divider Note - (a) Other Specifications of the roads shall be as per IRC norms. (b) Incases where the sector road passes through the land and makes it unbuildable or wherein the developer cannot implement the scheme effectively the sector road would be allowed to be re-aligned with the prior permission of the ULB. 10 | RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (b) Power Supply and Street Lighting (i) Inthe Township / Mini Township scheme the developer should provide for a plot of land (approx. 1000 to 1500 sq. mtrs. per 20 hectares) at a suitable location to the electricity authorities at no cost so that the electric sub- station for the township can be set up. The plot area will be considered in facilities area of the layout plan. (ii) The development of electrification, power network and power load requirement in any township/ mini township area shall be in accordance with the norms, rules & regulations of State electricity agency. After the completion of the electrification work, the developer shall handover the complete system to the concerned State electricity agency. (iii) Street Lights — All the roads having width above 24 meters _ shall have a divider as well as the street poles fixed on the divider having provisions of underground cabling. Other roads will have single light poles erected on either side of the road. The distance between poles should not be more than 30 meters. The illumination levels of the roads shall be as per the standard of local electricity company / National Building Code. After the completion of the street light work, the developer may

Chunk 63:
developer shall handover the complete system to the concerned State electricity agency. (iii) Street Lights — All the roads having width above 24 meters _ shall have a divider as well as the street poles fixed on the divider having provisions of underground cabling. Other roads will have single light poles erected on either side of the road. The distance between poles should not be more than 30 meters. The illumination levels of the roads shall be as per the standard of local electricity company / National Building Code. After the completion of the street light work, the developer may handover the complete system to the ULB / Local Electricity Company or to any other maintenance company. (c) Water Supply (i) All the water lines should be underground having a provision of providing connections to the plot-holder. The sizes of water pipe should be as per norms laid down by competent authority (PHED norms). (ii) The township should have underground water tank as well as over head water tank as per PHED norms. The township should also have provision for Telephones, Gas pipeline etc. (iii) The complete water supply shall be in accordance with the technical guidelines of the PHED. (iv) After the completion of the water supply scheme, the developer may handover the laid distribution and storage system to the PHED/ULB/private operator. (d) Sewerage & Drainage (i) All the plots in the Township / Mini Township scheme should be well connected with the underground sewerage line with proper slope, with a permission of sewerage treatment plant (STP) in the Township / Mini Township scheme. It is mandatory for the developer to establish and operate STP in the township. Recycling of treated waste water for gardening and flushing (as per norms of Environment) should also be provided for. (ii) The sewerage line should normally be located close to the boundary wall of the plots (within about 10 ft.) with a provision for connection from plots. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of

Chunk 64:
with a permission of sewerage treatment plant (STP) in the Township / Mini Township scheme. It is mandatory for the developer to establish and operate STP in the township. Recycling of treated waste water for gardening and flushing (as per norms of Environment) should also be provided for. (ii) The sewerage line should normally be located close to the boundary wall of the plots (within about 10 ft.) with a provision for connection from plots. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (e) Horticulture & Plantation Allroads should have plantation tree guards on both sides having minimum two trees per plot subject to minimum of 30 trees per acre of the gross area. Trees of heights more than 5 ft. should be planted. All the parks should be developed by the developer and maintained by the developer till the Township / Mini township scheme is complete and handed over to the ULB or to the Resident Welfare Association / Society. (f) Solid Waste Management The developer must submit a detailed plan for the disposal of solid waste management and ensure its implementation till the Scheme is handed over to the ULB / Resident Welfare Body or any other entity. (g) Rainwater Harvesting And Water Recycling “Community rainwater harvesting structures" should be constructed by developer and all water outlets and drainages should be connected in such a way so as to recycle the water for gardening, washing etc after treatment. This should be strictly enforced by the ULB. Wherever feasible dual water supply system should be adopted by the developer - one for fresh water and the other for recycled treated waste water (h) Construction of Dwelling Units The developer shall develop and construct at least 10 % dwelling units of the total units / plots in the township (more than 10 hectares) schemes. (i) Solar Heating System In the proposed scheme solar heating system shall also be provided as per the provisions

Chunk 65:
connected in such a way so as to recycle the water for gardening, washing etc after treatment. This should be strictly enforced by the ULB. Wherever feasible dual water supply system should be adopted by the developer - one for fresh water and the other for recycled treated waste water (h) Construction of Dwelling Units The developer shall develop and construct at least 10 % dwelling units of the total units / plots in the township (more than 10 hectares) schemes. (i) Solar Heating System In the proposed scheme solar heating system shall also be provided as per the provisions of prevailing building regulations or as per the provisions in this regard made from time to time. 7.03

Chunk 66:
Completion Certificate The internal development works carried out by the developer should be as per the specifications mentioned above in clause 7 or as per requirement of ULB. On completion of the Internal Development works, the developer must submit a certificate from Registered Chartered Engineer Such certificate shall be required at the time of handing over of the scheme for maintenance to the ULB./RWA. However, it is mandatory that the developers shall complete all the internal developmental works within time frame as per Table-D from the date of approval of the layout. Note- (a) Forensuring internal development of the area, patta/ lease deed (Sale permission) of 12.5

Chunk 67:
% of the saleable plots will be withheld by the ULB. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (b) ULB may allow proportionate releasing of the withheld plots based on the development of any part of the scheme after getting a report from the Registered Chartered Engineer, with regard to development of the Township / Mini Township. Table-D (Residential Township) Internal development works like Roads, drains, power supply and street lighting, sewerage, & water supply,etc. | 20-50 hectares - 6years in case of township / mini township schemes including construction of 10 % of dwelling units 10-20 hectares - 4years Above 50hectares - 7 years Note: (i) Development works should be started within a period of six months from the date of release of layout plan by the ULB. (ii) The time period may be extended up to two years with 10% penalty of total prevailing conversion charges by the ULB with prior approval of the State Govt. (iii) Benefit of concessional stamp duty not to be available in the extended time period. In that case stamp duty shall be charged on the reserve price of that area of ULB. (iv) Developer to maintain Township / Mini Township Schemes for at least 3 years after completion of development in all respects. Maintenance charges may be recovered by the developer from the allottees. (v) If the developer does not start the development work within a period of one year from the date of release of the layout plan, then the ULB shall be authorized to cancel the approval of the scheme. (vi) If any developer starts the development of any scheme / township

Chunk 68:
period. In that case stamp duty shall be charged on the reserve price of that area of ULB. (iv) Developer to maintain Township / Mini Township Schemes for at least 3 years after completion of development in all respects. Maintenance charges may be recovered by the developer from the allottees. (v) If the developer does not start the development work within a period of one year from the date of release of the layout plan, then the ULB shall be authorized to cancel the approval of the scheme. (vi) If any developer starts the development of any scheme / township without getting approval from the ULB, the ULB shall take action against the developer in accordance with the directions issued by Government and provisions of applicable laws. 8.00

Chunk 69:
VARIOUS CHARGES PAYABLE BY DEVELOPER Before issue of patta to the developer or his nominee/s following charges shall be deposited (i) Conversion Charges These are charges levied for conversion of agricultural land into non-agricultural purposes for residential or other purposes. Different zone-wise charges are fixed for each town of Rajasthan. After completion of change of land use, conversion of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes and approval of layout plan, RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan developer shall deposit complete conversion charges. After deposition of conversion charge the layout plan shall be released. (ii) Lease Charges Lease money is payable at the Conversion Charges for such schemes which is calculated as under: - a) Residential purpose - @ 2.5

Chunk 70:
% per annum on 4 times of the residential conversion charges. (One-time lease amount of 20% calculated for 8 years) b) Institutional purpose — same as above. c) Commercial purpose - @ 5% per annum on 4 times of the residential conversion charges. (One-time lease amount of 40% calculated for 8 years) One-time lease money is payable which is equivalent to the lease money payable for eight years. (iii) Stamp duty In case of the first allottees of the plots in the scheme (residential, institutional, industrial, tourism etc), Stamp Duty is payable at the rate of 4 times the conversion charges calculated for the purpose of lease money. In case of commercial plots, the Stamp Duty shall be chargeable at the rate of 8 times the residential conversion charges. For subsequent transfers and incase of plots re-allotted after cancellation, stamp duty would be payable on the normal reserve price fixed by the ULB. (iv) External/ Peripheral Development Charges (EDC) External development charges (EDC) payable to the ULB would include such works like approach roads, cross drainage, street lighting, plantation, storm water drains etc connecting the scheme for which ULB shall charge following minimum external development charges: a) For Towns with population up to one lac Rs 100 per sq mt as per census 2001 b) For Towns above one lac up to ten lacs Rs 150/ per sq mt population as per Census 2001 c) For Towns with population above ten lacs Rs. 200/- sq. mt. as per census 2001 (Jaipur) Note: (i) In case of developed areas of any town (where basic infrastructure like approach road of at least 18 meters width and power line is available within a radius of 500 meters), EDC of not more than Rs. 100/- per square meter would be charged. 14 | RAJASTHAN

Chunk 71:
population up to one lac Rs 100 per sq mt as per census 2001 b) For Towns above one lac up to ten lacs Rs 150/ per sq mt population as per Census 2001 c) For Towns with population above ten lacs Rs. 200/- sq. mt. as per census 2001 (Jaipur) Note: (i) In case of developed areas of any town (where basic infrastructure like approach road of at least 18 meters width and power line is available within a radius of 500 meters), EDC of not more than Rs. 100/- per square meter would be charged. 14 | RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (ii) For providing water supply, power lines and sewer connection separate charges would be payable to the concerned agency as and when this work is taken up. For providing water supply the developer may develop source of water at his own cost. However developer may get water line to the township from Public Health Engineering department (PHED) for which the developer has to pay the demand raised by PHED. (iii) EDC shall be charged on gross area. Before the issue of pattas by the ULB proportional EDC should have been paid to the ULB. For delay in payment of EDC 12% simple rate of interest shall be charged from the due date. (iv) The amount, deposited as EDC, shall be kept in a separate fund in the urban local body (ULB). The ULB shall utilize this fund for providing external / peripheral development in the particular area after an assessment of the local infrastructure requirements. (v) The State Government shall have full rights for the revision of the EDC as deemed necessary from time to time. (vi) Onreceiving the EDC, the ULB will complete the external development works normally within 3 years timeframe from the date of release of layout plan. (vii) In case of individual industrial plots, EDC for using the existing infrastructure may be

Chunk 72:
as EDC, shall be kept in a separate fund in the urban local body (ULB). The ULB shall utilize this fund for providing external / peripheral development in the particular area after an assessment of the local infrastructure requirements. (v) The State Government shall have full rights for the revision of the EDC as deemed necessary from time to time. (vi) Onreceiving the EDC, the ULB will complete the external development works normally within 3 years timeframe from the date of release of layout plan. (vii) In case of individual industrial plots, EDC for using the existing infrastructure may be charged, which shall be as follows:- a) For Towns having population up to 50,000 Rs 20/- per Sqm. b) For Towns having population above 50000 & below 1 lac Rs 30/- per Sqm. c) For Towns having population | lac & above Rs 50/- per Sqm. 9.00

Chunk 73:
SALE PERMISSION FOR TOWNSHIP/SPECIALTOWNSHIP  (i) The developer can start booking of plots/flats in the project only after release of approved layout plan / Maps from the ULB and completion of the process of the change of land use and 90-B under the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956. The

Chunk 74:
formal information of booking shall be submitted by the developer to the ULB. The developer can sell the plots / flats as per the approved layout plan and shall issue a provisional patta to the allottee, in the standard format issued by the department. The provisional patta / possession letter issued in any other format shall not to be acceptable by the ULB for issue the lease deed in favour of the allottee. (ii) The developer shall complete all the internal development works of the layout within time frame as per Table-D. The ULB shall not issue patta / lease deed for 87.5

Chunk 75:
% of the saleable plots / flats till some of the essential development works like roads, power line and water supply have been made available. The remaining 12.5

Chunk 76:
% saleable plots / flats (withheld by the ULB) can be sold only after completion of the all the internal development works and completion of 10% dwelling units in the project. In addition to the above ULB may also take Bank Guarantee in consonance with the cost of development of the remaining infrastructure. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 10.00

Chunk 77:
GENERAL PROVISIONS It should be ensured by the concerned ULB that the Township scheme is approved by it as per the time frame notified by the State Government. (i) First patta or lease deed shall be issued to the developer or his nominees based on the list submitted by the developer. The developer of the township / housing schemes shall submit the list of "Nominees" on his own or through registered power of attorney holder. As per the list given, ULB shall issue the patta in favour of such nominee / nominees. (ii) Theallottee can be a person / company / HUF/ legal body / partnership firm etc. 11.00

Chunk 78:
MISCELLANEOUS (i) | The concerned ULB will acquire land for sector plan / zonal plan roads under Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and develop all sector plan / zonal plan roads as soon as possible after approval of the sector plan / zonal plan. The developer may also prepare the proposal for acquisition of sector plan roads (exactly in accordance with the Government procedure) for the sector roads in the Township / Scheme. (ii) | Due to shortage of funds with ULB , ULB may construct sector roads on PPP basis. (iii) | Gross Residential density shall be prescribed on the basis of available external infrastructure. (iv) All public areas to have provision for physically handicapped. (v) | Adherence of specifications and quality control should be ensured by the ULB along with penal provisions for violation / misuse of facility areas by the developer. (vi) The design of the township should aim at water and energy conservation. This would mean: ¢ Proper orientation of building blocks. ¢ Use of appropriate building material. ¢ Use of non conventional energy sources, particularly solar energy where ever feasible. ¢ Recycling of waste water and water harvesting. (vii) MOEF norms for Townships & provisions of Environmental clearance as required by Ministry of Environment and Forest (G.O.1.

Chunk 79:
) shall be applicable.  (viii) Ifany F.D.I. project is forthcoming the concerned ULB would process and clear the scheme as per the policy directions of the G.O.L. (present policy is narrated in Ministry of Commerce & Industry G.O.I. Circular No. 5(6) 2000 FC dated 03.03.

Chunk 80:
2005). Conversion charges as applicable shall be levied. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 12.00

Chunk 81:
INCENTIVES FOR TOWNSHIP PROJECTS Following incentives shall be provided to the township developer for new schemes to be approved after the issuance of this Policy. (A) Acquisition of the Private Land (only for 20 Hectares and Above) Contiguous land availability to the developers for the Township projects is a key issue for proper development of large townships. In case, where the township developer has acquired 3/4" parcel of the land for the proposed township and if developer is facing problems in acquisition of the remaining 1/4" parcel of the land, then in such circumstances, the ULB shall acquire the land at the request made by the developer to the concerned urban ULB. The compensation of the land to be decided on the basis of mutual negotiation decided by a Committee comprising of Commissioner / Secretary / Zonal officer of the ULB, LAO, representative of District Collector and developer. Based on the negotiations cheques for each of the khatedar would be drawn by the developer and deposited with the LAO. These would thereafter be handed over to the khatedars by the LAO. The ULB shall charge 10% of the total award / negotiated amount of acquired areas as administrative charges. In case this land needs to be transferred in the name of Developer Company, it shall be transferred on payment of stamp duty on DLC rate for agricultural lands. (B) Land Conversion of the Undivided Share Land Non division of the agricultural land in the revenue records makes it difficult for the Authorized Officer to ascertain the share of each of the applicant co- khatedars. In order to expedite the process of approvals, the Authorized Officer appointed under the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act-1956 shall be entitled to divide the undivided share of the Khatedar in cases where there is mutual consent

Chunk 82:
case this land needs to be transferred in the name of Developer Company, it shall be transferred on payment of stamp duty on DLC rate for agricultural lands. (B) Land Conversion of the Undivided Share Land Non division of the agricultural land in the revenue records makes it difficult for the Authorized Officer to ascertain the share of each of the applicant co- khatedars. In order to expedite the process of approvals, the Authorized Officer appointed under the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act-1956 shall be entitled to divide the undivided share of the Khatedar in cases where there is mutual consent of all the concerned Khatedars. For this purpose State Government may delegate the powers under section-260 of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act-1956 to him. Such land could be considered for approval under 90-B of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956, change in land use and, layout plan approval after getting it divided by Authorized Officer. (C) Allotment of Government Land within the Township Scheme In case where Government land (Siwai Chak or Rasta, Pathway, Charagah, Land belonging to local bodies (undeveloped land) etc) having an area of 10% of the township scheme or 25 Acres (which ever is less) is falling within the proposed township scheme area, then in order to facilitate contiguous development of the scheme, Government land may be allotted and in lieu of this the developer shall allot saleable developed plots to the ULB equivalent to 60% of the land (residential and commercial in the overall ratio of the scheme). In case plotting RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan is not being undertaken by the developer (in case of Group Housing or Special Township Schemes) equivalent land may be allotted to the ULB in another portion of the Scheme or the price of land may be charged from the developer at the reserve price of the area (or the reserve price of adjoining area). In case area of

Chunk 83:
of the scheme). In case plotting RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan is not being undertaken by the developer (in case of Group Housing or Special Township Schemes) equivalent land may be allotted to the ULB in another portion of the Scheme or the price of land may be charged from the developer at the reserve price of the area (or the reserve price of adjoining area). In case area of government land to be allotted is more than 5 acres approval of State Government may also be taken. (D) Priority in Approval of the Scheme (i) Necessary approvals including orders under section 90-B of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956, change in land use and approval of the layout plan of such township projects shall be cleared within 90 days. (ii) Time bound approval / clearance by various government agencies like JVVNL, PHED, PWD or other relevant departments shall be provided. (iii) The chief administrative head of the concerned local body _ shall issue a certificate to the developer, for purpose of getting approvals on priority from other departments like PHED, JVVNL, or any other Departments related to development of such townships. (E) Availability of Land by the Local Bodies to other Concerned Government Organizations / Departments for Development of Services Facilities: Wherever facility land is available in the township schemes allotment of the same to departments like JVUVNL, PHED, Municipal bodies for power, water, fire fighting/solid waste disposal as per their minimum requirement may be made on priority All local bodies shall ensure that the area kept reserved for the services are allotted to the concerned departments under the prevailing policy. (F)_ The provisions of the Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holding Act, 1973 (Act No. 11 of 1973) shall not be applicable in case of the township scheme of any area. (G) State Government may consider any other additional incentives to large township on acase-to-case basis. 13.00

Chunk 84:
schemes allotment of the same to departments like JVUVNL, PHED, Municipal bodies for power, water, fire fighting/solid waste disposal as per their minimum requirement may be made on priority All local bodies shall ensure that the area kept reserved for the services are allotted to the concerned departments under the prevailing policy. (F)_ The provisions of the Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holding Act, 1973 (Act No. 11 of 1973) shall not be applicable in case of the township scheme of any area. (G) State Government may consider any other additional incentives to large township on acase-to-case basis. 13.00

Chunk 85:
REVIEW OF NORMS The State Government may based on technical advice review / relax any of the norms / parameters specified in the Policy based on merits of the case. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan PART-II (Government Land) 14.00

Chunk 86:
DEVELOPMENT OF TOWNSHIP BY PRIVATE DEVELOPER ON GOVERNMENT LAND ON PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP (PPP) MODEL  14.01

Chunk 87:
14.02

Chunk 88:
It has been observed that due to lack of resources with some of the urban local bodies they are unable to develop township schemes with proper infrastructure facilities/ facility areas / parks / play grounds, commercial areas etc which adversely affects the occupancy of these schemes. Hence, in order to provide good infrastructure and to ensure timely development of the major township projects on lands owned by the urban local bodies they would be allowed to involve the Private Developers for the development of townships. Following guidelines are issued in this regard. The following procedure, terms and conditions shall be applicable for the development of township under public private participation (PPP) model. 14.02.

Chunk 89:
1 Minimum Size of the Land:  Under PPP model the minimum size of the land parcel shall be 40 hectares.  14.02.

Chunk 90:
2 Urban Local Bodies shall identify the land parcels for which the Expression of Interest (EOI) shall be invited for selection of the developer to develop the township on PPP basis.  14.02.

Chunk 91:
3 Eligibility Criteria for the Developer : Gator Minimum Minimum Time period nee Minimum turnover number of Tech. Experience for Li di net worth (in last 5 Staff on payroll of land completion of H conn in Rupees year) in (for atleast last development — the complete : Rupees one year) project 1 2 3 4 2) 6 10 (a) < 40. 25.

Chunk 92:
ef, 200 cr. 50 5 yrs. 3 yrs. (b) 40-80 SUIcr: 3000 cr. 75 6 yrs. 4 yrs. (c) 80-200 75 cr. 500 cr. 100 T yrs. 5 yrs. (d) 200-400 100 cr. 750 cr, 150 8 yrs. 6 yrs. (e) > 400 250 cr. 1000 cr. 200 10 yrs. 8 yrs Note: (i) NetWorth means paid up capital + reserves less losses. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (ii) The experience required in column 6 shall be calculated on the basis of the experience of the applicant company along with the previous /present experience of the owner of parent company in the real estate sector subject to the condition that one of the Directors of the applicant company shall also be the Director of the parent company. (iii) To avoid the complicacy on the part of eligibility, the developer can apply through a new company constituted especially for the execution of the project, for which the owner or parent company can be considered for the qualification. (iv) The Government on the basis of the justified delay can extend the completion time period by additional 2 years. 14.02.

Chunk 93:
4. Preparation

Chunk 94:
of DPR, Bid Documents and NOC by Government: (i) The ULB shall through a reputed and experienced consultant have a Detailed Project Report (DPR) prepared as well as bid document and other required documents giving technical and financial details of the proposed scheme. Details of all the infrastructure facilities to be provided for the internal as well as external development shall be provided. This would include construction of approach road, internal road network, laying of water supply pipeline rising main and distribution network, sewerage- drainage facilities in the area, provision for rain water harvesting, recycling of water, provision for sewerage treatment plant in the area, plan for disposal of the solid waste of the area, electrification and street lighting in the area, tree plantation, development of open parks, development of public amenities and utilities, such as open parks, play ground, school , police station, dispensary / health centre, gymnasium/club house etc as per needs and requirements of the area. (ii) The DPR shall be examined by a Committee to be constituted by the ULB consisting of atleast three persons out of whom there shall be two technical experts one each in the area of town planning and engineering. DPR should also provide the building / construction specifications to be adopted by the developer. The estimated Project cost as well as the economics of the scheme should also be worked out. (iii) Based on the recommendation of Committee the proposal to develop the area through PPP model along with the DPR shall be sent to State Government for approval. After getting clearance from the State Government, the ULB shall invite Expression of Interest (EOI) for the development of the township at the identified location giving a period of atleast 45 days for receipt of proposals. } 20 RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above

Chunk 95:
also provide the building / construction specifications to be adopted by the developer. The estimated Project cost as well as the economics of the scheme should also be worked out. (iii) Based on the recommendation of Committee the proposal to develop the area through PPP model along with the DPR shall be sent to State Government for approval. After getting clearance from the State Government, the ULB shall invite Expression of Interest (EOI) for the development of the township at the identified location giving a period of atleast 45 days for receipt of proposals. } 20 RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (iv) Nature of Land Parcel: a) The land allotted by State Government tothe local bodies b) Land parcel acquired by the local bodies for development of township A minimum 15% of total number of plots or 5% of the total residential built up area/total residential area, whichever is higher, shall be reserved for construction of EWS /LIG flats in category of G+2 to G+3 floors with following built up area:- EWS 325 to 350 Sq. Ft. LIG 500 to 550 Sq. Ft. Rates for EWS/LIG category plots / Flats shall be as per Table B. 14.02.

Chunk 96:
5 Invitation of Bids.  After completing the necessary preparatory work open bids at the national/state level shall be invited from the eligible developers based on the approved DPR.  14.02.

Chunk 97:
6 Criteria for Selection. (i) The criteria for selection shall be the maximum area/ percentage of the developed land, (separately for each category i.e. residential, Institutional, and Commercial) to be offered by the developer to the concerned local body. The area to be retained by developer for his use can be put to various uses like residential / commercial / other facilities which should also be specified before hand (in terms of percentage of area to be allowed for each use). The developer shall be free to dispose of this area at his level. (ii) The ULB may specify some earnest money to be taken from the bidder. (iii) The successful bidder shall make all expenditure at his own level on the development of township as per the layout plan and terms of conditions of the authorization letter issued by the local body. (iv) Inorder to enable the developer to raise financial resources from the market / financial institutions he may be allowed to do so against the land parcel which has been earmarked for him in lieu of the development cost incurred by him on the township. (v) The final successful bidder shall submit a Performance guarantee in the form of Bank Guarantee @ 1% of the total estimated project cost for the successful and timely and quality completion of the project This Bank guarantee would be released at least after one year of the completion of the Project and its taking over by the ULB. (vi) The successful bidder shall make an agreement with the ULB to surrender the developed land to the ULB and retaining a portion of it as decided through the bidding process. The draft of the agreement shall be prepared by the ULB in consultation with selected developer and sent for approval of the

Chunk 98:
form of Bank Guarantee @ 1% of the total estimated project cost for the successful and timely and quality completion of the project This Bank guarantee would be released at least after one year of the completion of the Project and its taking over by the ULB. (vi) The successful bidder shall make an agreement with the ULB to surrender the developed land to the ULB and retaining a portion of it as decided through the bidding process. The draft of the agreement shall be prepared by the ULB in consultation with selected developer and sent for approval of the State Government. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (vii) | During the course of development the ULB would engage third party quality inspection team to ensure that quality work is being done. Quality certification may be done at various stages of the work. (viii) State Government or the ULB with the permission of the State Government would be free to put any other condition or modality or review the norms to safeguard the interest of the ULB as well as for the successful implementation of the Project. Sd/- (Gurdial Singh Sandhu) Principal Secretary to Govt. Department of Urban Development Housing & Local Self Government Govt. of Rajasthan RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan POLICY FOR RESIDENTIAL, GROUP HOUSING AND OTHER SCHEMES IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR, 2010 (UP TO 10 HECTARES) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan Government of Rajasthan DEPARTMENT OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT, HOUSING & LOCAL SELF GOVERNMENT No. F.3 (77) UDD/3/2010 Dated: 28/06/2010 NOTIFICATION Subject: Policy for Residential, Group Housing and other Schemes in the Private Sector, 2010 (Up to 10 hectares) In supersession of the Department notification F.10(1)UDD/3/2002 dated 01.01.

Chunk 99:
Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan POLICY FOR RESIDENTIAL, GROUP HOUSING AND OTHER SCHEMES IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR, 2010 (UP TO 10 HECTARES) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan Government of Rajasthan DEPARTMENT OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT, HOUSING & LOCAL SELF GOVERNMENT No. F.3 (77) UDD/3/2010 Dated: 28/06/2010 NOTIFICATION Subject: Policy for Residential, Group Housing and other Schemes in the Private Sector, 2010 (Up to 10 hectares) In supersession of the Department notification F.10(1)UDD/3/2002 dated 01.01.

Chunk 100:
02, 15.01.

Chunk 101:
.02,29.03.

Chunk 102:
07 and order dated 06.07.

Chunk 103:
02 and 27.12.

Chunk 104:
04 and any other orders / notifications issued in this regard, the State Government in order to promote planned development of new townships in the State and to encourage Private Sector Investment / Foreign Direct Investment (FDD in housing and real estate sector, following Policy for Residential, Group Housing and other Schemes in the Private Sector, 2010 (Up to 10 hectares) is hereby issued under section 337 of the Rajasthan Municipal Act, 2009, Section 90 of the Jaipur Development Authority Act, 1982,section 49 of the Jodhpur Development Authority Act, 2009, section 60 of the Rajasthan Housing Board Act, 1970 and Rule 31 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement (Disposal of urban lands) Rules, 1974 :- 1.00

Chunk 105:
INTRODUCTION  1.01

Chunk 106:
The State Government in order to promote planned / integrated development of various towns by ensuring the basic infrastructure facilities and to safeguard the interest of the public at large by providing residential plots/houses at affordable prices decided to review the existing Township Policy, 2002 and other Policies and Programmes pertaining to urban areas of Rajasthan. Following new initiatives have already been taken during the last one-year. (i) Rajasthan Municipal Act, 2009 (new enactment). (ii) Affordable Housing Policy, 2009 with focus on EWS/LIGH through public private partnership (PPP model). (iii) New Building Regulations, 2010 for Jaipur (in place of Building Regulations of 2000). (iv) Model Building Regulations for all towns of Rajasthan. (v) Detailed Guidelines for Sub-division and reconstitution of plots in urban areas. (vi) Slum Development Policy through PPP. (vii) Rajasthan Township Policy, 2010.

Chunk 107:
(viii) Draft Master Plan for Jaipur notified and other Towns. (ix) Rajasthan Town and Country Planning and Development Bill, 2010 (draft). (x) Policy for Transferable Development Rights (TDR) (draft) RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan A need was felt to lay down new Policy guidelines for Smaller Residential Schemes, Group Housing and other schemes (other than townships) to provide for smoother and speedier development of such schemes in the State without any ambiguity. 1.02

Chunk 108:
While preparing the new Township Policy guidelines, the Policies of other States like Maharashtra, Gujarat, Punjab and Haryana were studied. A workshop and series of discussions were held under the aegis of Institute of Town Planners, India (ITPJ), in which the President, ITPI; Secretary General, ITPI; Chief Town Planners and senior officers of Town Planning of Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Haryana, Gujarat and West Bengal and developers of Rajasthan were present.. Views were also sought from various urban local bodies in Rajasthan and agencies involved in the development of townships and residential schemes including the Rajasthan Builders & Promoters Association (RBPA) and Township Developers Association of Rajasthan (TODAR) and Rajasthan State Real Estate Development Council (RAJREDCO). 1.03

Chunk 109:
Taking into account various views/suggestions and learning from Policies being followed by other States as well the experience gained over the past few years, it was considered appropriate to frame a new Township Policy. Hence the Policy called "Policy for Residential, Group Housing and other Schemes in the Private sector (Up to 10 hectares) ,2010". 2.00

Chunk 110:
APPLICABILITY OF THE POLICY (1) _ Policy for Residential, Group Housing and other Schemes in the Private Sector (Upto 10 hectares), 2010 shall come into force with immediate effect (2) This Policy shall be applicable to the cases which are applied after the date of issue of this Policy as well as the pending cases. However pending cases in which notice under section 90-B of Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 has been issued before the issue of this Policy would be considered under the provisions of Township Policy, 2002 unless the developer exercises the option of being considered under Policy for Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes in the Private Sector, 2010.

Chunk 111:
(3) The Policy will apply to the areas listed below: (a) Areaunder the draft/ sanctioned master plan of town/region; (b) Areaunder the peripheral control belt of the master plan of a town/ region; (c) All areas covered under Planning and Development Authorities (Jaipur Development Authority, Jodhpur Development Authority), Urban Improvement Trusts (UIT's), Rajasthan Housing Board and Municipal Bodies in the State; (d) Any other area notified / approved by the Government } 24] RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 2.01

Chunk 112:
Types of schemes with area requirement— Following types of schemes are envisaged under this Policy:- (i) Residential scheme —Above 2 hectares and up to 10 hectares (ii) Small residential scheme up to 2 hectares (iii) Group Housing Scheme (iv) Farm House Scheme (v) Commercial Schemes (vi) Individual industrial units or a cluster of industrial units . (vii) Individual Institutional unit/tourism unit or a cluster of such units. 3.0

Chunk 113:
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT CONTROL REGULATIONS AND PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS (i) The developer shall apply for land conversion under section 90B of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956, change in land use & approval of layout plan in the prescribed formats as per the guidelines issued by Department pertaining to land conversion and change in land use. (ii) The Schemes shall not include the land under the forest, water bodies, land falling within 100m from (having the level below the HFL) the HFL of the major lakes, dams, land falling within 200m from the official boundary of Historical Monuments and places of Archaeological importance, Archaeological Monuments, Heritage Precincts, other restricted areas. (iii) The residential and special schemes shall have a minimum of 12m to 15 m approach road from any National Highway, State Highway, MDR, ODR sector plan roads, master plan roads or any other road area network road. (iv) Global FAR for the entire gross area of scheme shall be 1.20.

Chunk 114:
However the individual plots can be allowed maximum FAR as per Building Regulations. (v) Each ULB shall earmark one or more zones for township / residential development within the Master Plan area or within the Municipal area (where Master Plan is not available) Having such zones would facilitate providing all kinds of external infrastructures to the Scheme. The developer would be encouraged to come up with scheme on his own land in such a zone earmarked for Residential Purpose / Township Development in the Master Plan of the area. In case of any land whose land use plan has not been declared and 90B is to be done / has been done, these areas would be appropriately incorporated in the respective master plans / sector plan / zonal plan after change in land use as township zones. (vi) Any two or more schemes of different Persons/companies may be clubbed together in case of consent of all the parties and approved as a single scheme RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan subject to minimum limit of clubbed area as 10 hectares. In such cases the norms applicable to the area of the clubbed scheme shall apply. (vii) In case of the areas which are less than 2 hectares and are surrounded by the adjoining approved residential/Township schemes, then such land shall be encouraged to be merged with adjoining schemes. 4.00

Chunk 115:
to minimum limit of clubbed area as 10 hectares. In such cases the norms applicable to the area of the clubbed scheme shall apply. (vii) In case of the areas which are less than 2 hectares and are surrounded by the adjoining approved residential/Township schemes, then such land shall be encouraged to be merged with adjoining schemes. 4.00

Chunk 116:
SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT CONTROL AND PLANNING REGULATIONS FOR DIFFERENT SCHEMES  4.01

Chunk 117:
ForResidential Schemes (More than 2 hectares and up to 10 hectares) - The layout plan of the above schemes shall have the norms as detailed below-  Table —A  Percent area Remarks  1. Residential

Chunk 118:
/ | Up to 60% | Upto54% Plotted area/ group housing / highrise Commercial | of scheme | Upto 6% for commercial purposes portion area The commercial purpose can be for petrol pump / multiplex / commercial malls / cinemas / tourism / any other general commercial. Note: (i) For schemes of size upto 10 hectares - out of 6% commercial area some informal shops (10 such shops for every 100 plots) of sizes 6' x 6' to 10! x 10' to be provided which shall be used for kiosks, confectionary, vegetables, seasonal / morning market, etc.. Such informal shops shall be permissible on internal roads along with a minimum provision of parking in front of the informal shops, the percentage of land area used for parking in the planning shall be considered as a percentage of plotted area (60%). (ii) | EWS/LIG houses/plots shall be compulsory in all schemes of plotted area with minimum size of 2 hectares and for all schemes of Group Housing at least 50% of the houses constructed for EWS / LIG category should be of EWS category. In case of flats the building specifications shall be as specified in the Affordable Housing Policy, 2009.

Chunk 119:
(iii) |» EWS/LIG plots and informal shops shall be allotted to nominees of developer. (iv) For allotment of EWS /LIG houses / plots the income criteria as prescribed by State Government may be considered and the list of eligible and selected persons to be sent toconcerned ULB. | 26] RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan Facilities/ Open portion (Roads, parks & open spaces, schools, hospitals, etc.) Atleast 40% of scheme area Size of EWS/LIGH plots - 30 to 45 sq mtrs / 46 to 75 sq mtrs. respectively and disposal of EWS & LIG plots shall be @ 25% and 60% respectively, of the residential price being charged from other allottees. Size of EWS/LIGH fla ts to be -325-350 sq ft and 500- 550 sq ftrespectively and disposal shall be @ Rs.750/- per sq ft or as decided by Govt from time to time. 20-22% for internal road network (can be higher incase of sector roads passing through the scheme, in that case the area reserved for residential purposes may be reduced keeping the facility area and open park area as minimum 15 % ). 10% area reserved for facilities in layout plan shall be marked as area reserved for specified public utilities facilities like school, community centre, dispensary, club house and other public uses. In addition there shall be open land like parks (at least 5%). Note: (i) Inno case, the open and facility area shall be less than 15%. Internal roads shall not be less than 9 meters where the length of road is up to 100 meters and 12 mtrs where the length is more than 100 meters.

Chunk 120:
reduced keeping the facility area and open park area as minimum 15 % ). 10% area reserved for facilities in layout plan shall be marked as area reserved for specified public utilities facilities like school, community centre, dispensary, club house and other public uses. In addition there shall be open land like parks (at least 5%). Note: (i) Inno case, the open and facility area shall be less than 15%. Internal roads shall not be less than 9 meters where the length of road is up to 100 meters and 12 mtrs where the length is more than 100 meters. In the case of area used for EWS/LIGH housing the minimum road width can be 9 meters or lesser as provided in the Building Regulations /Affordable Housing Policy 2009. In

Chunk 121:
the case of commercial, institutional area, the minimum road width shall be 12 meters fora length of up to 200 meters and 18 meters for higher length The saleable facility area may be allotted to the developer at his request at the prevailing residential reserve price for the purpose for which has been reserved in the layout plan. In the event of developer not willing to take the land the concerned ULB shall allot it to some other applicant for the same purpose for which it was reserved in the scheme. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 4.02

Chunk 122:
For Smaller schemes (up to 2 hectares) (i) | Forsuch small schemes of plotted development internal sub division of 5 acres plot shall be permitted for carving out smaller plots with minimum 30% of the total plot area as open /parks/ roads/ facilities, etc. (instead of 40% area for bigger projects). (ii) Rowhousing/ Villaconstruction/ flats shall be allowed in such schemes. (iii) However, in case of plots of size up to 1 acre the above condition (of leaving 30% as open/park/road etc.) shall not be applicable and subdivision shall be allowed after leaving the required road width, where- ever necessary as decided by the local body. 4.03

Chunk 123:
ForGroup Housing and other Schemes of Single Patta (i) A single patta may be issued for group housing scheme or for any other scheme of non-agriculture purpose including Commercial / Institutional / Industrial/ medical/tourism projects (Resorts / Motel/hotel, etc). (ii) The parameters like ground coverage, FAR, Max Height parking etc shall be as per the Building Regulations. However in case of a Heritage zone / precinct separate guidelines may be issued by State Government. (iii) Multi storied separate parking block shall be allowed which shall not be considered in ground coverage but total ground coverage including parking block should not exceed 45 % in any case. 5.00

Chunk 124:
GUIDELINES FOR APPROVAL/COMPLETION OF INTERNAL DEVELOPMENT WORKS  5.01

Chunk 125:
In order to ensure quality development certain norms as mentioned below are being laid down. It is necessary that the developer should submit along with application for approval the following details: (i) Layout plan showing details of area to be utilized under plots, built up space, roads, open space for park, garden and play ground and other public utility and amenities, services and facilities. (ii) Details of nearby development (at least in the vicinity of 100 meters) along with its superimposition on sector plan. (iii) Details of internal development works as per specifications mentioned below (iv) Details ofeco friendly amenities provided; (v) Plan showing HFL of major lakes, water body, if any. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 5.02

Chunk 126:
InResidential Schemes and other schemes internal development works suchas Construction of roads, Laying of power line and Street lighting, Laying of Water lines, Development of Water Sources (Tube well), Ducting for road crossing, Construction and development of Parks and services area, Plantation along roads sides and parks shall be done by the developer only. 5.03

Chunk 127:
Work for laying of sewer line, storm water drainage, overhead Water tanks shall be done by ULB at a combined level of various adjoining schemes for which necessary charges shall be paid by developer to the ULB as per details below: (i) Laying of sewer lines - Rs.50/- Per Sq mt. of total area. (ii) Storm water drains - Rs.40/- Per Sq mt. of total area. (iii) Construction of Overhead - Rs. 50/- Per Sq mt of total area. tanks (optional for ULB) Note (i) The above amount is an average amount. However ULB may increase the charges of above items based on actual cost of the work. The above amount shall be deposited along with EDC at the time of issue of Patta. (ii) For ensuring internal development of the area, patta / lease deed (Sale permission) of 12.5

Chunk 128:
% of the saleable plots will be withheld by the ULB. (iii) Incase of plot for group housing of size more than 2 hectares, 5% area of plot (an independent plot with proper approach) shall be surrendered to the ULB for facilities. For plot size less than 5 acres, amount equivalent to 5% of the area calculated at residential reserve price of that area shall be deposited with ULB. (iv) Incase of single patta for Group Housing land for sector commercial shall not be surrendered to ULB. 5.04

Chunk 129:
Construction of Roads (i) All the internal road networks including draft sector plan / master plan roads within the scheme are to be developed by the developer. The sector roads are to be accommodated. (ii) The internal roads should be minimum 9 meters wide where the length of the road is up to 100 meters and 12 meters wide where road length is more than 100 meters. (iii) However, as for as possible no row of plots should be more than 200 mtrs in length except the sector plan / zonal plan / main arterial roads having width 18 M & above. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and 29, Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan The technical specifications for road construction shall be as follows: Table-B Paved width Berms width (both side) 18 meter 5.5

Chunk 130:
meter (2 lane) 2.5

Chunk 131:
meter 4. 24

Chunk 132:
meters and 2 lane each 7.5

Chunk 133:
meters with 2.5

Chunk 134:
meter above divider Note: (i) | Level and the specifications shall be finalized by the ULB keeping the specifications laid down by IRC. (ii) | Gradient shall be as per Indian Road Congress /CRRI. (iii) 1" layer WBM—90—45mm size (100mm compacted) (iv) 2" layer WBM — 63 — 45mm size (75mm compacted) (v) 3“ layer (crusher broken) WBM —53-22.4mm

Chunk 135:
(75mm compacted) (vi) 20mm PMC withseal coat  5.05

Chunk 136:
Power Supply and Street Lighting (i) The development of electrification, power network and power load requirement in any scheme shall be in accordance with the norms, rules & regulations of State electricity agency. After the completion of the electrification work, the developer shall handover the complete system to the concerned electricity distribution company. (ii) Street Lights — All the roads having above 18 meters width shall have divider as well as the street poles fixed on the divider having the provisions of underground cabling. Other roads will have streetlights on electric poles or single light poles erected on either side of the road. The distance between poles should not be more than 30 meters. The illumination levels of the roads shall be as per the standard of local electricity authority / National Building Code. After the completion of the street light work, the developer shall handover the complete system to the ULB / Maintenance Agency. 5.06

Chunk 137:
Water Supply All the water lines should be underground having a provision of providing connections to the plot. The sizes of water pipe should be per PHED norms. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan The scheme should have underground water tank as well as over head water tank as per PHED norms The complete water supply shall be in accordance with the technical guidelines of the PHED. After the completion of the water supply scheme, the developer may handover the laid distribution and storage system to the PHED/ULB/private operator. 5.07

Chunk 138:
Sewerage & Drainage  All the plots in the scheme should be well connected with the underground sewerage line with proper slope, The sewerage line should normally be located close to the boundary wall of the plots (within about 10 ft.) with a provision for connection of plots.  5.08

Chunk 139:
Horticulture & Plantation All roads should have plantation tree guards on both sides having minimum of 30 trees per acre of the gross area. Trees of 5 feet or more height should be planted. All the parks should be developed by the developer and maintained by the developer till the scheme is completed and handed over to ULB or to the Resident Welfare Society. 5.09

Chunk 140:
Rain Water Harvesting and Water Recycling Community rain water harvesting structures shall be constructed by developer. Similarly water recycling shall be provided as per Building Regulations and water from all water outlets and drainages should be collected for recycling for gardening, washing etc.. This should be strictly enforced by the ULB. 6.00

Chunk 141:
FARM HOUSE SCHEME (i) The farm house scheme can be approved on any road. (ii) | The land area parameters for farm house schemes shall be kept as 25:75, which means 25% of the gross land area shall be kept reserved for facilities and road area network. Out of the 25% area, 5% area shall be used for facilities and 20% area shall be used for road network inside the scheme. (iii) On the remaining 75% of the land, Farm House scheme with each farm house having minimum area of 2500 sq. m.can be planned. (iv) InaFarm house built up area shall be 10% of the plot area or 500 sqm whichever is less. Other Parameters shall be as per the prevailing Building Regulations. Note -— Construction of internal roads and other development works for such schemes shall be done by the developer at his own cost. No external development shall be done by ULB for such schemes. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 7.00

Chunk 142:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ON LAND OF SICK UNITS IN RIICO INDUSTRIALAREAS OR ELSEWHERE (i) Incase of sick industrial units in RIICO industrial area, which are lying closed for the last over 10 years and for which there is no sanctioned revival scheme the surplus land may be allowed to be used for housing for economically weaker sections (EWS) and low-income groups (LIG) under the Affordable Housing Policy, 2009. At

Chunk 143:
least 40% of the total plot area should be put to such use. Out of which atleast 50% area should be kept for facilities / open area. The approval of such low-cost housing would be granted by the concerned urban local body keeping in view the provision of the Affordable Housing Policy, 2009 and directions issued by Department of Urban Development and Housing from time to time. The balance 60% of the plot area can be used for other purposes. (ii) Private sick industrial units shall also be allowed for Affordable Housing Scheme on the same terms and conditions as prescribed in the Affordable Housing Policy, 2009. 8.

Chunk 144:
00 COMPLETION CERTIFICATE The Internal Development works carried out by the developer should be as per the specifications mentioned above in clause 6 or as per requirement of ULB. On completion of the Internal Development works, the developer must submit a certificate from Registered Chartered Engineer. Such certificate shall be required at the time of handing over of the scheme for maintenance to the ULB. However, it is mandatory that the developers should complete all the internal developmental works within 3 years. (unless extended further by the ULB/State Government on payment of penalty to be determined separately). Note - (i) For ensuring internal development of the area, patta/lease deed of 12.5

Chunk 145:
% of the saleable plots will be withheld by the ULB.  (ii) ULB may allow proportionate releasing of the withheld plots based on the development of any part of the scheme after getting a report from the Registered Chartered Engineer, with regard to development of the internal development works.  9.00

Chunk 146:
GROUPHOUSING All internal development works including establishment of STP, Water Treatment plant, power supply, GSS, roads, water supply etc inside the premises shall be done by the developer as per norms laid down by the competent body (ULB or the concerned Department/A gency of the State). RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan 10.00

Chunk 147:
VARIOUS CHARGES PAYABLE BY DEVELOPER Patta for the Scheme area may be issued to the developer or to his nominee(s). However, before issue of patta to the developer or his nominee , following charges shall be deposited by him. (i) | Conversion Charges- These are charges levied for conversion of agricultural land into non-agricultural purposes for residential or other purposes. Different zone-wise charges are fixed for each town of Rajasthan. After completion of change of land use, conversion of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes and approval of layout plan, developer shall deposit complete conversion charges. After deposition of conversion charge the layout plan shall be released. (ii) Lease Charges - Lease money is payable for such schemes which is calculated as under: - (a) Residential purpose - @ 2.5

Chunk 148:
% per annum on 4 times of the residential conversion charges. (One-time lease amount of 20% for 8 years) e.g. in case of conversion rate of Rs.90 per sq.mt. for a particular area charges would be 2.5

Chunk 149:
% of Rs. 360 per sq. mt. (4 times of Rs. 90). One time lease amount payable would be 20% of Rs. 360/- per sq. mt. (b) Institutional, Industrial, Tourism etc purpose — same as above. (c) Commercial purpose - @ 5% per annum on 4 times of the residential conversion charges. (One-time lease amount of 40% for 8 years) In all such cases one-time lease money is payable which is equivalent to the lease money payable for eight years. (iii) Stamp duty - In case of the first allottees of the plots in the scheme (residential, institutional, industrial, tourism etc. ), Stamp Duty is payable on the amount calculated as 4 times of the conversion charges for residential purposes. In case of commercial plots, the Stamp Duty shall be chargeable on the amount calculated as 8 times of the residential conversion charges. For subsequent transfers of a plot or incase of re-allotment of a plot after its cancellation, stamp duty would be payable on the normal reserve price fixed by the ULB for the area. (iv) External/Peripheral Development Charges (EDC) - Some key external development works shall be undertaken by the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and other concerned agencies by providing infrastructure facilities like sector road, power lines, water supply, approach road, sewer lines, power lines, drainage network, etc. at the periphery of the scheme. In so far as the ULB is concerned it shall undertake only a few of these works against the charges paid to it. These would include the approach road, sector roads plantation along the approach road/ sector roads street lighting along the approach road / sector roads cross drainage works and storm-water drains. For these works the ULBs would charge the following minimum external development charges would be payable - RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above

Chunk 150:
by providing infrastructure facilities like sector road, power lines, water supply, approach road, sewer lines, power lines, drainage network, etc. at the periphery of the scheme. In so far as the ULB is concerned it shall undertake only a few of these works against the charges paid to it. These would include the approach road, sector roads plantation along the approach road/ sector roads street lighting along the approach road / sector roads cross drainage works and storm-water drains. For these works the ULBs would charge the following minimum external development charges would be payable - RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (a) For Towns with population up to - Rs 100/- per sq mt. one lac (as per census 2001) (b) For Towns above one lacs up to - Rs 150/ per sq mt. ten lacs population (as per Census 2001) (c) For Towns with population above - Rs. 200/- sq. mt. ten lacs (as per census 2001, Jaipur) Note: (i) In case of developed areas of any town (where basic infrastructure like 18 mt.wide road and power lines are available within a radius of 500 meters), EDC of not more than Rs. 100/- per square meter would be charged. (ii) EDC shall be charged on gross area of the scheme. (iii) The above EDC charges shall not include the cost of providing sewer line, water supply and power line to the scheme and charges for the same shall have to be provided separately by the developer to the concerned agency based on their estimates. For providing water supply the developer may develop source of water at his own cost. However if required developer may contact PHED for providing water line to their premises for which the developer has to pay the demand of PHED. (iv) The amount deposited as EDC shall be kept in a separate fund by the urban local body (ULB). The ULB shall utilize this fund

Chunk 151:
cost of providing sewer line, water supply and power line to the scheme and charges for the same shall have to be provided separately by the developer to the concerned agency based on their estimates. For providing water supply the developer may develop source of water at his own cost. However if required developer may contact PHED for providing water line to their premises for which the developer has to pay the demand of PHED. (iv) The amount deposited as EDC shall be kept in a separate fund by the urban local body (ULB). The ULB shall utilize this fund for providing external / peripheral development in the particular area after assessing the local infrastructure requirements. The State Government shall have full rights to revise the EDC as deemed necessary from time to time. (v) On receiving the EDC, the ULB will complete the requisite external development works within the prescribed timeframe. (vi) In case of Group Housing Schemes, EDC shall be one and half times of the normal EDC for residential purposes. (vii) In case of Institutional area/tourism units, EDC shall be at par with residential area but charged on double of the ground built up area.. (viii) Incase of commercial area, EDC shall be two times of the residential area. (ix) In case of individual industrial plots, EDC for using the existing infrastructure may be charged, which shall be as follows:- a) For Towns having population - Rs 20/- per Sqm. up to 50,000 b) For Towns having population - Rs 30/- per Sqm. above 50000 and below 1 lac c) For Towns having population - Rs 50/- per Sqm. 1 lac & above 34 RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan ULB shall not bear any obligation to provide any additional infrastructure to such plots within this EDC. (x) EDC for Farmhouses scheme shall be Rs 50/- per Sqm for using existing infrastructure chargeable on double of the built

Chunk 152:
population - Rs 30/- per Sqm. above 50000 and below 1 lac c) For Towns having population - Rs 50/- per Sqm. 1 lac & above 34 RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan ULB shall not bear any obligation to provide any additional infrastructure to such plots within this EDC. (x) EDC for Farmhouses scheme shall be Rs 50/- per Sqm for using existing infrastructure chargeable on double of the built up area allowed in such cases. ULB shall not bear any obligation to provide any additional infrastructure to such plots in this EDC. 11.00

Chunk 153:
SALE PERMISSION FOR RESIDENTIAL AND OTHER SCHEMES (i) The developer can start booking of plots or built up space in the project only after release of approved layout plan / Maps from the ULB and completion of the process of the change of land use and land conversion under section 90-B of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956.

Chunk 154:
(ii) A formal information of booking of plots shall be submitted by the developer to the ULB. The developer can sell the plot / built up space as per the approved layout plan and shall issue a provisional patta to the allottee, in the standard format issued by the Department. The provisional patta / possession letter issued in any other format shall not be acceptable by the ULB for issue the lease deed in favour of the allottee. The built up space may be sold through registered sale deed. (iii) The developer shall complete all the internal development works of the layout within time frame as per Table—C. (iv) The ULB shall issue patta / lease deed for 87.5

Chunk 155:
% of the saleable plots after some of the bare minimum infrastructure like roads, water and power supply has been provided by the developer.The remaining 12.5

Chunk 156:
% saleable plots (with held by the ULB) can be sold only after completion of the all the internal development works. However single patta may be issued to the developer after completion of the process mentioned at 11(i) above.  12.00

Chunk 157:
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SCHEMES UPTO 10 HECTARES OF LAND (i) First patta or lease deed can be issued to the khatedar/developer or to the nominee/s of the khatedar/developer. However in the projects of group housing/commercial/institutional etc single patta may be given to the khatedar/ developer or his nominee at his choice. (ii) The developer of the residential scheme shall submit the list of "Nominees" on his own or through registered power of attorney holder. As per list given, ULB shall issue the patta in favour of such nominee/nominees. (iii) The ULB shall issue the lease deed in favour of the allottee under certain terms and conditions, which shall be abided by the allottee. RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and | 35 Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan (iv) The nominee's list / details shall be submitted by the developer to the concerned urban local body. The nominee can be a person / company / HUF / legal body / partnership firm etc. (v) Time limit for completion of various projects would be as in Table-C Table- C Time Limit for Completion of Project Time period from date of Approval of Layout Plan Internal development works like Upto 2 hectares - 18 months. >2-10 hectares - 36 months Roads, drains, power supply and street lighting, sewerage, & water supply, etc. (i) | Development works should be started within a period of six months from the date of approval of layout plan and completed within the period mentioned above. If the developer does not start the development work within a period of one year from the date of approval of the layout plan, then the ULB shall be

Chunk 158:
C Time Limit for Completion of Project Time period from date of Approval of Layout Plan Internal development works like Upto 2 hectares - 18 months. >2-10 hectares - 36 months Roads, drains, power supply and street lighting, sewerage, & water supply, etc. (i) | Development works should be started within a period of six months from the date of approval of layout plan and completed within the period mentioned above. If the developer does not start the development work within a period of one year from the date of approval of the layout plan, then the ULB shall be authorized to cancel the approval of the scheme. (ii) The time period may be extended up to two years with 10% penalty of total prevailing conversion charges by the ULB. (iii) Benefit of concessional stamp duty not to be available in the extended time period beyond three years. In that case stamp duty shall be charged on the normal reserve price of that areaof ULB. (iv) Developer to maintain the Scheme for at least 3 years after completion of development in all respects. He may handover the maintenance of the area to the Residents Welfare Society. Maintenance charges may be recovered by the developer from the allottees. (v) Ifany developer starts the development of any scheme without getting approval from the ULB, then the ULB shall take action against the developer in accordance with the directions issued by the State Government and provisions of prevailing laws. 13.00

Chunk 159:
MISCELLANEOUS (i) The concerned ULB will acquire land for Draft sector plan / zonal plan roads under Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and develop all sector plan / zonal plan roads as soon as possible after approval of the draft sector plan / zonal plan. The developer may also prepare the proposal for acquisition of sector plan roads (in 36 | RAJASTHAN TOWNSHIP POLICY-2010 (above 10 Hectares) and Policy For Residential, Group Housing and Other Schemes In The Private Sector (up To 10 Hectares) Department of Urban Development, Housing & Local Self Government, Government of Rajasthan accordance with the Government procedure) for the sector roads in his Scheme area (ii) Due to shortage of funds with ULB timely development of the sector plan roads is not possible, resulting in unplanned / haphazard development of the cities, ULB may construct sector roads on PPP basis. (iii) Adherence to specifications and quality control should be ensured and violation / misuse of facility areas by the developer are to be strictly avoided. (iv) The design of the scheme should aim at water and energy conservation. This would mean: e Proper orientation of building blocks. e Use of appropriate building material. e Use of non-conventional energy sources, particularly solar energy wherever feasible. e Rainwater harvesting and recycling of waste water, MOEF norms for Townships & provisions of Environmental clearance as required by Ministry of Environment and Forest (G.O.L.) shall be applicable. (v) Incase of any government land falling within the area of the scheme the ULB may (if there is no scheme of ULB for the land in question) consider allotting the same to the developer upto 10% area of the scheme at the reserve price of the area or DLC rate, whichever is higher. In case the government land exceeds 10% of the area,

Chunk 160:
energy sources, particularly solar energy wherever feasible. e Rainwater harvesting and recycling of waste water, MOEF norms for Townships & provisions of Environmental clearance as required by Ministry of Environment and Forest (G.O.L.) shall be applicable. (v) Incase of any government land falling within the area of the scheme the ULB may (if there is no scheme of ULB for the land in question) consider allotting the same to the developer upto 10% area of the scheme at the reserve price of the area or DLC rate, whichever is higher. In case the government land exceeds 10% of the area, prior approval of State Government shall be obtained. (vi) Within the Scheme area, if any F.D.I. project is applied then the ULB would process and clear the scheme as per the policy directions of the G.O.I. (present policy is narrated in Ministry of Commerce & Industry G.O.I. Circular No. 5(6) 2000 FC dated 03.03.

